The Project Gutenberg eBook, A History of Pantomime, by R. J. Broadbent


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: A History of Pantomime

Author: R. J. Broadbent

Release Date: September 15, 2004  [eBook #13469]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF PANTOMIME***


E-text prepared by Jonathan Ingram, Linda Cantoni, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



A HISTORY OF PANTOMIME

by

R. J. BROADBENT

Author of "STAGE WHISPERS," etc.

LONDON:







TO

WILLIAM WADE, ESQUIRE.

This book is dedicated as a small token of the
Author's esteem and regard.

R.J.B.




PREFACE.


One of the most important factors in the making of Theatrical History
has been that of Pantomime, yet in many of the published works dealing
with the History of the Stage it has, with the exception of a passing
reference here and there, been much neglected.

It is with a view of conveying to the reading public some little, and,
perhaps, new information about this ancient form of entertainment that I
am tempted to issue this History of Pantomime in the hope and belief
that it may not only prove interesting, but also instructive, to all
lovers of the Stage.

R.J.B.

Liverpool, December, 1901.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

Origin of Pantomime


CHAPTER II.

Origin of Tragedy and Comedy--Mythology--The meaning of
the word Pantomime--The origin of Harlequin, Columbine,
Clown, and Pantaloon--Grecian Mythology--Transformation
Scenes--The rise of Grecian Tragedy and Comedy--The
Satirical Drama


CHAPTER III.

The origin of the Indian Drama--Aryan Mythology--Clown
and Columbine--Origin of the Chinese Drama--Inception
of the Japanese Drama--The Siamese Drama--Dramatic
performances of the South Sea Islanders, Peruvians,
Aztecs, Zulus, and Fijis--The Egyptian Drama


CHAPTER IV.

"Dancing," _i.e._ Pantomime--Grecian Dancing and Pantomimic
Scenes--Aristotle--Homer--Dances common to
both Greeks and Romans


CHAPTER V.

Thespis--The Progress of Tragedy and Comedy--Aeschylus--The
Epopee--Homer--Sophocles--Euripides--Grecian
Mimes--The First Athenian Theatre--Scenery
and Effects


CHAPTER VI.

Roman Theatres--Description--"Deadheads"--Pantomime
in Italy--Livius Andronicus--_Fabulae Atellanae_--Extemporal
Comedy--Origin of the Masque, Opera, and
Vaudeville--Origin of the term Histrionic--Etruscans--Popularity
of Pantomime in Italy--Pantomimists banished
by Trajan--Nero as a Mime--Pylades and Bathyllus--Subjects
chosen for the Roman Pantomimes--The Ballet--The
_Mimi_ and _Pantomimi_--_Archimimus_--Vespasian--Harlequin--"Mr.
Punch"--Zany, how the word originated--Ancient
Masks--Lucian, Cassiodorus, and Demetrius
in praise of Pantomime--A celebrated _Mima_--Pantomimes
denounced by early writers--The purity of the
English stage contrasted with that of the Grecian and
Roman--Female parts on the Grecian and Roman stages--The
principal Roman _Mimas_--The origin of the Clown
of the early English Drama


CHAPTER VII.

Introduction of the Roman Pantomimic Art into Britain--First
English reference to the word Pantomime--The
fall of the Roman Empire--The sacred play--Cornish
Amphitheatres--Pantomimical and Lyrical elements in
the sacrifice of the Mass--Christian banishment of the
_Mimis_--Penalties imposed by the Church--St. Anthony
on Harlequin and Punch--Vandenhoff--what we owe to
the _Mimis_


CHAPTER VIII.

Pantomime in the English Mystery or Miracle Plays and
Pageants--A retrospect of the Early Drama--Mysteries
on Biblical events--Chester, Coventry, York, and Towneley
Mystery Plays--Plays in Churches--Traces of the
Mystery Play in England in the Nineteenth Century--Mystery
Plays on the Continent--The Chester series of
Plays--The Devil or Clown and the _Exodiarii_ and
_Emboliariae_ of the Ancient Mimes


CHAPTER IX.

The Clown or Fool of the early English Drama--Moralities--The
Interlude--The rise of English Tragedy and
Comedy--"Dumb Shews" in the Old Plays--Plays
suppressed by Elizabeth--A retrospect


CHAPTER X.

The Italian Masque--The Masque in England--First
appearance in this country of Harlequin--Joe Haines as
Harlequin--Marlowe's "Faustus"--A Curious Play--The
Italian Harlequin--Colley Cibber, Penkethman--Shakespeare's
Burlesques of the Masque--Decline of the Masque


CHAPTER XI.

Italian Pantomime--Riccoboni--Broom's "Antipodes"--Gherardi--Extemporal
Comedies--Salvator Rosa--Impromptu Acting


CHAPTER XII.

Pantomimical Characters--Neapolitan Pantomime--The
Harlequin Family--The Original Characters in the
Italian Pantomimes--Celebrated Harlequins--Italian
and French Harlequins--A French view of the English
Clown--Pierrots' origin--Pantaloon, how the name has
been derived--Columbine--Marionette and Puppet Shows


CHAPTER XIII.

Italian Scenarios and English "Platts"--Pantaloon--Tarleton,
the Clown--Extemporal Comedy--The Poet
Milton--Ben Jonson--The Commonwealth--"A Reign
of Dramatic Terror"--Robert Cox and his "Humours"
and "Drolleries"--The Restoration


CHAPTER XIV.

Introduction of Pantomimes to the English Stage--Weaver's
"History of the Mimes and Pantomimes"--Weaver's
Pantomimes--The prejudice against Pantomimes--Booth's
counsel


CHAPTER XV.

John Rich and his Pantomimes--Rich's Miming--Garrick,
Walpole, Foote--Anecdotes of Rich--Pope--The dance
of internals in "Harlequin Sorcerer"--Drury Lane--Colley
Cibber--Henry Fielding, the Novelist--Contemporary
Writers' opinion of Pantomime--Woodward, the
Harlequin--The meaning of the word Actor--Harlequins--"Dr.
Faustus," a description--William
Rufus Chetwood--Accidents--Vandermere, the Harlequin--"Orpheus
and Eurydice" at Covent Garden--A
description--Sam. Hoole, the machinist--Prejudice
against Pantomime--Mrs. Oldfield--Robert Wilks--Macklin--Riot
at Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre--Death of Rich


CHAPTER XVI.

Joseph Grimaldi


CHAPTER XVII.

Plots of the old form of Pantomimes--A description of
"Harlequin and the Ogress; or the Sleeping
Beauty of the Wood," produced at Covent Garden--Grimaldi,
_Pere et Fils_--Tom Ellar, the Harlequin, and
Barnes, the Pantaloon--An account of the first production
of the "House that Jack built," at Covent Garden--Spectacular
display--Antiquity and Origin of some
Pantomimic devices--Devoto, Angelo, and French, the
Scenic Artists--Transparencies--Beverley--Transformation
Scenes


CHAPTER XVIII.

Pantomimic Families--Giuseppe Grimaldi--James Byrne,
the Harlequin and Inventor of the modern Harlequin's
dress--Joseph Grimaldi, Junior--The Bologna Family--Tom
Ellar--The Ridgways--The Bradburys--The
Montgomerys--The Paynes--The Marshalls--Charles
and Richard Stilt--Richard Flexmore--Tom Gray--The
Paulos--Dubois--Arthur and Charles Leclerq--"Jimmy"
Barnes--Famous Pantaloons--Miss Farren--Mrs.
Siddons--Columbines--Notable Actors in Pantomime


CHAPTER XIX.

Popular Pantomime subjects--Poor Pantomime Librettos--Pantomime
subjects of our progenitors--The various
versions of "Aladdin"--"The Babes in the Wood"--"Blue
Beard"--"Beauty and the Beast"--"Cinderella"--"Dick
Whittington"--"The House that Jack Built"--"Jack
the Giant Killer"--"Jack and the Beanstalk"--"Red
Riding-Hood"--"The Sleeping Beauty in the
Wood"--Unlucky subjects--"Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves"--"The Fair One with Golden Locks"--The
source of "Sindbad the Sailor" and "Robinson Crusoe"


CHAPTER XX.

Pantomime in America


CHAPTER XXI.

Pantomimes made more attractive--The Restrictive Policy
of the Patent Houses--"Mother Goose" and "George
Barnwell" at Covent Garden--Lively Audiences--"Jane
Shore"--"Harlequin Pat and Harlequin Bat"--"The
first speaking opening"--Extravagence in Extravaganzas--The
doom of the old form of Pantomime--Its
revival in a new form--A piece of pure Pantomime--Present
day Mimetic Art--"_L'Enfant Prodigue_"--A
retrospect--The old with the new, and conclusion




CHAPTER I.

Origin of Pantomime.


From the beginning of all time there has been implanted in the human
breast the Dramatic instinct full of life and of vigour, and finding
undoubtedly its outlet, in the early days of civilization, if not in the
Dramatic Art then in the poetry of motion with that necessary and always
essential concomitant of both--Pantomime. Indeed, of the Terpsichorean
Art, it has been truly observed "That deprived of the imitative
principle (_i.e._, Pantomime), the strength, the mute expression, it
becomes nothing but a series of cadenced steps, interesting merely as a
graceful exercise." Equally so in every way does it apply to the
Dramatic Art, which minus its acting, its gestures--in a word, its
Pantomime--we have nothing but, to quote Hamlet, "Words, words, words."

In observing "That all the world's a stage, and the men and women merely
players," Shakespeare doubtless included in the generic term "players,"
Pantomimists as well: Inasmuch as this, that when, and wherever a
character is portrayed, or represented, be it in real life or on the
stage--"Nature's looking-glass," and the world in miniature--the words
that the individual or the character speaks, are accompanied with
gesture and motion, or, in other words, Pantomime, when "The action is
suited to the word, the word to the action."

To trace the original origin of Pantomime, or Mimicry, we must go to
Nature herself where we can find this practised by her from the
beginning of all time as freely, and as fully, as ever it was, or ever
will be, upon the stages of our theatres. What better evidence, or
instances, of this can we have than in those studies of her handiwork?
as the larger species of caterpillars, when, by stretching themselves
out in imitation of, and to make their foes think that they are snakes;
tigers and lions choosing a background in keeping with, and in imitation
of, the colours of their bodies, in order to seize their unwary prey;
and for the same purpose crocodiles imitating a rotting log; the green
tint of the lizard's skin for the sake of concealment; the playful
imitativeness of the mocking bird; the hysterical laugh of the hyaena;
the gaudy colours of tropical snakes imitated by others, besides many
other examples of Mimicry, in such as butterflies of the species
_Danaidae_ and _Acraediae_, the _Heliconidiae_ of tropical America; and
hornets, wasps, ants, and bees. All this, it may be urged, is only
instinct. True; but is it not also Mimicry--the Pantomime of Nature,
and, though, of course, of a different kind, and for very different
objects, is, nevertheless, of a kind of instinctive Pantomime or Mimicry
which each and every one of us possesses in greater or lesser degrees,
and as much as we do the Dramatic instinct.

The very name Pantomime itself signifies Nature as Pan was amongst the
Ancients, the allegorical god of Nature, the shepherd of Arcadia, and
with _Mimos_, meaning an imitator, we have, in the combination of these
two words, "an imitator of Nature," and from whence we derive the origin
of our word Pantomime.

Dryden says:--

    "Pan taught to join with wax unequal reeds;
    Pan loves the shepherds and the flocks he feeds."

"Pan," says Servius, "is a rustic god, formed in similitude of Nature,
whence he is called Pan, _i.e._, All: for he has horns in similitude of
the rays of the sun and the horns of the moon; his face is as ruddy as
the imitation of the aether; he has a spotted fawn skin on his breast in
likeness of the stars; his lower parts are shaggy on account of the
trees, shrubs, and wild beasts; he has goat's feet to denote the
stability of the earth; he has a pipe of seven reeds on account of the
harmony of the heavens, in which there are seven sounds; he has a crook,
that is a curved staff, on account of the year, which runs back on
itself _because he is the god of all Nature_."

Bernardin de St. Pierre observes of Pantomime, "That it was the first
language of man; it is known to all nations; and is so natural and so
expressive that the children of white parents learn it rapidly when they
see it used by the negroes."

Of the Pantomimic language--a universal language and common to the whole
world from time immemorial--Charles Darwin says in his "Descent of Man,"
that "The intellectual and social faculties of man could hardly have
been inferior in any extreme degree to those now possessed by the
lowest savage; otherwise primeval man could not have been so eminently
successful in the struggle for life as proved by his early and wide
diffusion. From the fundamental differences between certain languages
some philologists have inferred that, when man first became widely
diffused, he was not a speaking animal; but it may be suspected that
languages, far less perfect than any now spoken, _aided by gestures_,
might have been used, and yet have left no traces on subsequent and more
highly-developed tongues."

With the progress of, and also as an aid to, civilization how could the
traveller or the trader, not only in the beginning of time, but also
now, when occasion demands, in their intercourse with foreign nations
(unless, of course, they know the language) make themselves understood,
or be able to trade, unless they were or are able to use that "dumb
silent language"--Pantomime? Civilization undoubtedly owes much of its
progress to it, and, also the world at large, to this only and always
universal language. To both the deaf, as well as the dumb, its
advantages have ever been apparent.

Therefore, from prehistoric times, and from the beginning of the world,
we may presume to have had in some form or another, the Pantomimic Art.
In the lower stages of humanity, even in our own times, there is, in all
probability, a close similarity to the savagedom of mankind in the early
Antediluvian period as "This is shown (says Darwin) by the pleasure
which they all take in dancing, rude music, painting, tattooing, and
otherwise decorating themselves--in their mutual comprehension of
_gesture language_, and by the same inarticulate cries, when they are
excited by various emotions." It naturally follows that even if there
was only dancing, there must necessarily, as a form of entertainment,
have also been Pantomime. Again, all savage tribes have a war-dance of
some description, in which in fighting costume they invariably go
through, in Pantomimic form, the respective movements of the Challenge,
the Conflict, the Pursuit, and the Defeat, whilst other members of the
tribe, both men and women, give additional stimulus to these
representations by a rude form of music.

The Ostyak tribe of Northern Asia give us a specimen of the rude
imitative dances of early civilization in a Pantomimic exhibition of the
Chase; the gambols and habits of the wolf and other wild beasts. The
Pantomimic dances of the Kamchadales are in imitation of birds, dogs,
and bears; and the Damaras represent, by four of the tribe stooping down
with their heads together, and uttering harsh cries, the movements of
oxen, and of sheep. The Australian Bushmen Mimic the leaping of calves,
the antics of the baboon, and the buzzing of swarms of bees. Primitive
Pantomimic dancing is practised amongst the South Sea Islanders, and
other races, and just as it was, presumably, at the beginning of the
world.

Having briefly traced the origin of Pantomime, and the source of
dancing, let us, in order to further amplify my subject, look at also
for a moment the origin of music, in the time of prehistoric man.

From Nature also do we derive this art, as "The sighing of the wind
passing over a bed of reeds is Nature's first suggestion of breath," and
of music. The clapping of hands and the stamping of feet is man's first
element in the making of music, which developed itself into the
formation of drums, bells, and cymbals, and the evolution of the same
primary principle.

It has been argued, and also ridiculously pretended, that in the
Antediluvian period mankind only lived in caves with the hairy mammoth,
the cave bear, the rhinoceros, and the hyaena, in a state of barbarous
savagery; and that only since the Deluge have the Arts been known and
cities built on this terrestrial sphere of ours. Could anything be more
fallacious?

We know, from the Bible, that the first man was created about six
thousand years ago, and some sixteen hundred and fifty-six years
afterwards the inhabitants of the world, with the exception of Noah and
his family, consisting of eight souls all told, were destroyed by the
flood. Noah and his family, we can take it, were of the same race of
mankind then on the earth, of the same descent and of the same flesh and
blood (as we all are) of our common father and mother, Adam and Eve; yet
we are not told that Noah (he was six hundred years old when he went
into the Ark) and his family were savages. In the 4th chapter, 21st
verse of Genesis, of Jubal-Cain, we learn that "He was the father of all
such as handle the harp and organ"; and in the following verse,
Tubal-Cain is described as "An instructor of every artificer in brass
and iron."

We learn, also, that magnificent statues were made in Egypt some six
thousand years ago; and that mention is made of a statue of King
Cephren, said to have been chiselled about this period, and many learned
men also affirm that letters were known to the inhabitants of the
Antediluvian world. All this, however, hardly looks like the work of a
barbarous race, and points to an acquaintance with the Arts, at any rate
of Music and Sculpture, and that of the artificers and workers in brass
and iron.

To follow, for my subject, this reasoning a little further, if there was
music (which, doubtless, there was) there must also have been dancing,
and, if dancing, there must, in the Antediluvian age, as a form of
entertainment, have also been Pantomime. On the other hand, even
supposing that man, at this period, was nothing else but a complete
savage, the words of Darwin, that I have quoted on a previous page,
conclusively proves, I think (on a common-sense like basis), of the
existence of dancing, a rude form of music, and, of course, Pantomime at
this epoch.

Ingersoll's doctrine was that "The distance from savagery to Shakespeare
must be measured not by hundreds, but by millions, of years."

Finally, why, and for what reason, should the Lord God, in His
all-seeing goodness and mercy, punish the inhabitants of the
Antediluvian world if they were only poor unenlightened savages? Was it
not because they were idolaters and worshippers of idols, "And that
every imagination of the thoughts of his (man's) heart was only evil
continually," as the sixth chapter and fifth verse of Genesis tells us?
This then being so, we know also that in every ancient form of religion
dancing was one of the acts of worship, and if dancing, there must as
previously stated, have also been Pantomime.




CHAPTER II.

Origin of Tragedy and Comedy--Mythology--The meaning of the word
Pantomime--The origin of Harlequin, Columbine, Clown, and
Pantaloon--Grecian Mythology--Transformation Scenes--The rise of Grecian
Tragedy and Comedy--The Satirical Drama.


In the year 2347 B.C., in Chapter 9, verse 20, in Genesis, there occurs:
"And Noah began to be a husbandman, and he planted a vineyard." This is
one of the first acts that Noah did after the Deluge, and it is, as
history tells us, from the rites and ceremonies in celebration of the
cultivation of the vine, that we owe the origin of Tragedy and Comedy.

After the Deluge God placed His bow in the heavens as His covenant with
man that the world should no more be accursed; and in the first ages of
this world's history, Noah and his descendants celebrated their
deliverance from the Ark, the return of the seasons, and the promise of
plenty in their several religious rites and ceremonies. The children of
Shem had in general Asia as their portion; Japhet had Europe; and Ham,
Africa.

Soon, however, religion began to lose its purity, and it then began to
degenerate very fast. Men began to repair to the tops of mountains,
lonely caves and grottoes, where they thought resided their gods. To
honour them they erected altars and performed their vows. Amongst the
Ancients their Mythology went no further than the epoch of the Deluge,
and in honour of which, and also of the Ark, they erected many temples
called Aren, Theba, Argus (from whence was probably derived the Argo of
the Argonauts, and the sacred ship of Osiris), Cibotus, Toleus, and
Baris.

The symbol by which the Mythologists represented the Ark was an immense
egg. This was supposed to have been produced by Ether and Chaos, at the
bidding of Time, the one ethereal being who created the universe. By Nox
(Night) the egg was hatched, which, being opened into two parts, from
the upper part was formed heaven, and the lower earth.

In the sacred rites of Osiris, Isis, and the Dionysia of Bacchus, the
Ark or Ship was introduced. The Dove, by many nations, in their
celebrations, was looked upon as a special emblem of peace and
good-will. Theba, in Egypt, was originally one of the temples dedicated
to the Ark. Both priests and sooth-sayers were styled Ionah or Doves. To
Dodona, in Epirus, was brought this and the first Grecian oracle all the
rites and history of the Thebans. The priestesses of this temple were
known in the Latin as _Columbae_. It is from this word that we derive
the name Columbine, which means, in the Italian, "little dove." Homer
alludes to the priestesses as doves, and that they administered to Zeuth
(Noah). Nonnus speaks of Cadmus, and others of Orpheus, as introducing
into Greece the rites of Dionysus or Bacchus.

The Ancients, mentions Kennedy in his work on "Mythology," have highly
reverenced Noah, and designated him as Noa, Noos, Nous, Nus, Nusas,
Nusus (in India), Thoth, Hermes, Mercury, Osiris, Prometheus,
Deucalion, Atlas, Deus, Zeus, and Dios. Dios was one of the most ancient
terms for Noah, and whence was derived Deus--Nusus compounded of Dios
and Nusos, which gives us Dionysus, the Bacchus of the Greeks, and the
chief god of the heathen world. Bacchus was, properly speaking, Cush
(the son of Ham, and grandson of Noah), though both Dionysus and Bacchus
are, by ancient writers, frequently confounded with one another.

The resting of the Ark upon Mount Baris, Minyas, the Ararat of Moses in
Armenia, the dispersal of the flood, the multiplication of the families
of the earth, and the migration from the plains of Shinar of the
descendants of the sons of Chus or Cush (as it is sometimes written),
and called Chushites or Cushites, to different parts of the world, being
joined by other nations, particularly those of the descendants of Ham,
one of the sons of Noah. They were the first apostates from the truth,
but being great in worldly wisdom and knowledge they were thought to be,
and looked upon as a superior class of beings. Ham they looked upon as a
divinity, and under the name of Ammon they worshipped him as the Sun,
and Chus likewise as Apollo, a name which was also bestowed by the
Ancients upon Noah. The worship of the sun in all probability originated
the eastern position in our churches.

Another of the ancient deities worshipped by the Ammonians was Meed, or
Meet, the Cybele of the Phrygians, the nurse of Dionysus, and the Soul
of the World.

Nimrod, the "mighty hunter" (who possessed the regions of Babylonia and
Chaldee), and one of the sons of Cush, was the builder of that seminary
of idolatory the City and Tower of Bel, and erected in honour of the god
Bel, and another name for the sun. Upon the confusion of tongues when
hitherto "The whole earth was of one language, and of one speech," it
came to be known as Babylon, "The City of Confusion." Homer introduces
Orion (Nimrod) as a giant and a hunter in the shades below, and the
author of the "Pascal Chronicles" mentions that Nimrod taught the
Assyrians or Babylonians to worship fire. The priests of Ammon, named
Petor or Pator, used to dance round a large fire, which they affected in
their dancing to describe. Probably from this the Dervish dances all
over the East may be traced to this source.

Kennedy observes, of the confusion of tongues at Babel, that it was only
a labial failure, so that the people could not articulate. It was not an
aberration in words or language, but a failure and incapacity in labial
utterance. Epiphanius says that Babel, or Babylon, was the first city
built after the flood.

The Cushites were a large and numerous body, and after their dispersion
from Babylon they were scattered "Abroad upon the face of the earth."
They were the same people who imparted their rites and religious
services into Egypt, as far as the Indus and the Ganges, and still
further into Japan and China. From this event is to be discovered the
fable of the flight of the Grecian god Bacchus, the fabulous wanderings
of Osiris, and the same god under another name, of the Egyptians.
Wherever Dionysus, Osiris, or Bacchus went, the Ancients say that he
taught the cultivation of the soil, and the planting of the vine.
Dionysus, Bacchus, or Osiris, as I have shown in a preceding page, were
only other designations for Noah.

Of the Hindu heathen deity, Vishnu, Father Boushet mentions an Indian
tradition, concerning a flood which covered the whole earth, when Vishnu
made a raft, and, being turned into a fish, steered it with his tail.
Vishnu, like Dagon, was represented under the figure of a man and fish.

Strangely enough, the regions said to have been traversed by Dionysus,
Osiris, or Bacchus were, at different times, passed through by the
posterity of Ham, and in many of them they took up their residence. In
his journeyings the chief attendants of Osiris, or Bacchus, were Pan,
Anabis, Macedo, the Muses, the Satyrs, and Bacchic women were all in his
retinue. The people of India claim him as their own, and maintain that
he was born at Nusa in their country. Arrian speaks of the Nuseans as
being the attendants of Dionysus. In all traditions Dionysus appears as
the representative of some power of Nature.

The first who reduced Mythology to a kind of system were, in all
probability, the Egyptians. Egypt was ever the land of graven images,
and under the veil of Allegory and Mythology the priests concealed
religion from the eyes of the vulgar. In the beginning, brute animals
and certain vegetables were represented as the visible symbols of the
deities to which they were consecrated. Hence Jupiter Ammon was
represented under the figure of a Ram; Apis under a Cow; Osiris of a
Bull; Mercury or Thol of an Ibis; Diana or Babastis of a Cat; and Pan of
a Goat. From these sources are derived the fabulous transformation of
the gods celebrated in Egyptian Mythology, and afterwards imported into
Greece and Italy to serve as the subjects of the Grecian and Roman
Pantomimes.

Pantomime as we now know the term, means, not only the Art of acting in
dumb show, but also that of a spectacle or Christmas entertainment. (I
may add in parenthesis, that in the early part of the last century--the
nineteenth--the dictionaries only refer to Pantomime as meaning the
former of the above two definitions, and not the latter.)

Pan, regarded as the symbol of the universe, was also the god of flocks,
pastures, and shepherds in classic Mythology, and the guardian of bees,
hunting and fishing in his Kingdom of Arcadia. His form, like the
Satyrs, both supposed to have been the offsprings of Mercury, was that
of a man combined with a goat, having horns and feet like the latter
animal.

_Mimos_ (Gr.), as I have stated in the beginning, means an "imitator,"
or a "mimic," and from which word we have the derivation of the words
"mimicry," "mimetic," and the like.

Pan was the traditional inventor of the Pandean pipes, and also from
his name we derive many words that are in our language, such as "panic"
(Pan used to delight in suddenly surprising the shepherds whilst tending
their flocks), and the other attributes of this noun, including that
recently coined term of the Americans, "panicy."

Pan is said to have been the son of Mercury, or even Mercury himself,
and others say that he was the son of Zeus. Mercury and Zeus, it will be
remembered in Mythology, were only names for Noah. Pan is unnoticed by
Homer.

A heathen deity of Italy, Lupercus, the guardian of their flocks and
pastures, has also been identified with Pan, and in whose honour annual
rural festivals, known as Lupercalia, were observed.

The Lupercalian festivals were held on the 15th of the Kalends of March.
The priests, Luperci, used to dance naked through the streets as part of
the ceremonies attached to the festival.

Mention has been made by Dr. Clarke, in his "Travels," Vol. IV., that
Harlequin is the god Mercury, with his short sword _herpe_, or his rod,
the _caduceus_ (which has been likened to the sceptre of Judah), to
render himself invisible, and to transport himself from one end of the
earth to the other, and that the covering on his head, the winged cap,
was the _petasus_. Apropos of this, the following lines in the tenth
Ode, of the first book of Horace, will probably occur to the reader:

    "Mercury! Atlas' smooth-tongued boy, whose will
      First trained to speed our wildest earliest race,
    And gave their rough hewn forms with supple skill
      The gymnast's grace.

    "'Tis thine the unbodied spirits of the blessed,
      To guide to bliss, and with thy _golden rod_
    To rule the shades; above, below, caressed
      By every god."

Mercury, as we have seen, was among the Ancients, only another name for
Noah. "Indeed," says Dr. Clarke, "some of the representations of Mercury
upon ancient vases are actually taken from the scenic exhibitions of the
Grecian theatre; and that these exhibitions were also the prototypes
whereon D'Hancarville shows Mercury, Momus, and Psyche delineated as we
see Harlequin, Columbine, and Clown on our stages. The old man
(Pantaloon), is Charon (the ferryman of hell). The Clown is Momus, the
buffoon of heaven, the god of raillery and wit, and whose large gaping
mouth is in imitation of the ancient masks."

Amongst the Aryans, Medians, Egyptians, Chaldeans, Babylonians, and
other nations (including our own, as did not Lilly predict the execution
of Charles I., the plague, the great fire of London, and other events)
was astrology practised. The Egyptians peopled the constellation of the
Zodiac (the first open book for mankind to read), with Genii, and one of
the twelve Zodiacal signs was Aries (the Ram). The ram is of the same
species as the goat, and the god Pan was the Goat god, as we know. The
astrologers, in their divinations and rulings of the planets placed the
various parts of the body under a planetary influence. The head and face
were assigned to the house of Aries, and therefore the face notably for
the Pantomimic Art was placed by the ancient astrologers under the
influence of this particular planet.

The heathen worship of Pan was not only known in Arcadia, but also
throughout Greece, although it did not reach Athens until after
Marathon.

Of Pan's death Plutarch tells the story that in the reign of Tiberius,
one Thamus, a pilot, visiting the islands of Paxae, was told of this
god's death. When he reached Palodes he told the news, whereupon loud
and great lamentations were heard, as of Nature herself expressing her
grief. The epoch of the story coincides with the enactment of that grim,
and the world's greatest tragedy on the hill of Golgotha, and the end,
and the beginning of a new world. Rabelais, Milton, Schiller, and also
Mrs. Browning, have allusions to this story of Plutarch's.

The ambitious family of the Titans (the bones of the "giants on the
earth" before the Deluge, gave rise to the stories of the Titans found
in caves), and their scions and coadjutors Jupiter, Juno, Mars, Mercury,
Apollo, Diana, Bacchus, Minerva, or Pallas, Ceres, Proserpine, Pluto,
and Neptune furnish by far the greatest part of the Mythology of Greece.
Tradition says that they left Phoenicia about the time of Moses to
settle in Crete, and from thence they made their way into Greece, which
was supposed at that time to be inhabited by a race of savages. The arts
and inventions were communicated to the natives, and the blessings of
civilization in process of time inspired the inhabitants with
admiration. They, therefore, relinquished worshipping the luminary and
heavenly bodies, and transferred their devotion to their benefactors.
Then into existence sprang the most inconsistent and irreconcilable
fictions. The deified mortals, with their foibles and frailities, were
transmitted to posterity in the most glorious manner possible, and hence
accordingly, in both the Odyssey and the Iliad of Homer, we have a
strange and heterogeneous mixture of what is not only mighty in heroes,
but also that which is equally mean.

In the Grecian Mythology the labours of Hercules, the expedition of
Osiris, the wanderings and transformation of Io, the fable of the
conflagration of Phaeton, the rage of Proserpine, the wanderings of
Ceres, the Eleusinian Mysteries, the Orgia, or sacred rites of Bacchus,
in fine, the ground work of Grecian Mythology is to be traced to the
East, from where also all our nursery tales, and also our popular
Pantomime subjects; (which is the subject of another chapter) perhaps,
with the exception of our own "Robinson Crusoe," originated.

The nine Muses called Pierides in Grecian Mythology were the daughters
of Jupiter and Mnemosyne (Memory), supposed to preside over the liberal
Arts and the sciences. They were Calliope (Heroic Poetry), Clio Euterpe
(Music), Erato (Love Poetry), Melpomene (Tragedy), Polyhymnia (Muse of
Singing and Rhetoric), Terpsichore (Dancing), Thalia (Comedy), and
Urania (Astronomy). Mount Parnassus, Mount Helicon, and the fountains of
Castalia and Aganippe were the sacred places of the Muses.

The Eleusinian Mysteries are of a period that may be likened to the 7th
century B.C., and at these Mysteries as many as 30,000 persons, in the
time of Herodotus, assembled to witness them. The attributes of these
Grecian Mysteries, like those of the Egyptians, consisted of
processions, sacrificial offerings, purifications, dances, and all that
the Mimetic and the other Arts could convey; add to this the various
coloured lights, and the fairy-like grandeur of the whole, we have
something that may be likened to the Transformation, and other
fairy-like scenes of English Pantomimes and Extravaganzas.

At the Orgia, or sacred rites of Bacchus, the customary sacrifice to be
offered, because it fed on vines, was the goat. The vine, ivy, laurel,
asphodel, the dolphin, lynx, tiger, and ass were all sacred to Bacchus.
The acceptable sacrifice to Venus was a dove; Jupiter, a bull; an ox of
five years old, ram or boar pig to Neptune; and Diana, a stag. At the
inception of the Bacchanalian festivals in Greece, the tragic song of
the Goat, a sacred hymn was sung, and from which rude beginning sprang
the Tragedy and Comedy of Greece. The Greeks place every event as
happening in their country, and it is not surprising that they claim for
themselves the inception of Tragedy and Comedy, which they undoubtedly
were the originators of in Greece, but the religious festivals of
Dionysus, Osiris, and Bacchus, to which we are supposed to owe the
inception of Tragedy and Comedy, were known long before the Greeks knew
them. (Dionysus was the patron and protector of theatres.) "The purport
of the song was that Bacchus imparted his secret of the cultivation of
vines to a petty prince in Attica, named Icarius, who happened one day
to espy a goat brouzing upon his plantations, immediately seized, and
offered it up as a sacrifice to his divine benefactor; the peasants
assembled round their master, assisted in the ceremony, and expressed
their joy and gratitude in music, songs, dances, and Pantomime on the
occasion; the sacrifice grew into a festival, and the festival into an
annual solemnity, attended most probably every year with additional
circumstances, when the countrymen flocked together in crowds, and sang
in rustic strains the praises of their favourite deity."

Amongst the reported followers of these Bacchanalian festivals were
those fabulous race of grotesque sylvan beings, previously referred to,
known as the Satyrs. They were of a sturdy frame, in features they had
broad snub noses, and appeared in rough skins of animals with large
pointed ears, heavy knots on their foreheads, and a small tail. The
elder Satyrs were known as Sileni. The younger were more pleasing and
not so grotesque or repulsive in appearance as the elder Satyrs. To the
Satyrs can be traced the variegated dress of the modern Harlequin, as in
ancient Greek history mention is made of the performers enacting Satyrs
being sometimes habited in a tiger's skin of various colours, which
encircled the performer's body tightly, and who carried a wooden sword,
wore a white hat, and a brown mask. According to Servius (as we have
seen) Pan had also a bright spotted dress "in likeness of the stars."

From these rustic festivals originated the Satyr, or Satirical Drama, as
did its Italian prototype, the _Fabulae Atellanae_ or, _Laudi Osci_.
These rural sacrifices became, in process of time, a solemn fast, and
assumed all the pomp and splendour of a religious ceremony; poets were
employed by the magistrate to compose hymns, or songs, for the occasion;
such was the rudeness and simplicity of the age that their bards
contended for a prize, which, as Horace intimates, was scarce worth
contending for, being no more than a goat or skin of wine, which was
given to the happy poet who acquitted himself best in the task assigned
him.

From such small beginnings Tragedy and Comedy took their rise; and like
(as the best writers on these subjects tell us) every other production
of human art, extremely contemptible; that wide and deep stream, which
flows with such strength and rapidity through cultivated Greece, took
its rise from a small and inconsiderable fountain, which hides itself in
the recesses of antiquity, and is almost buried in oblivion; the name
alone remains to give us some light into its original nature, and to
inform us, that Tragedy and Comedy, like every other species of poetry,
owe their birth to Religion.

Appropriately does Horace observe:--

    "Nor was the flute at first with silver bound,
    Nor rivalled emulous the trumpet's sound;
    Few were its notes, its forms were simply plain,
    Yet not unuseful was its feeble strain,
    To aid the chorus, and their songs to raise,
    Filling the little theatre with ease,
    To which a thin and pious audience came
    Of frugal manners, and unsullied fame."




CHAPTER III.

The origin of the Indian Drama--Aryan Mythology--Clown and
Columbine--Origin of the Chinese Drama--Inception of the Japanese
Drama--The Siamese Drama--Dramatic performances of the South Sea
Islanders, Peruvians, Aztecs, Zulus, and Fijis--The Egyptian Drama.


Of the Indian Drama we learn that the union of music, song, dance, and
Pantomime took place centuries ago B.C., at the festivals of the native
gods, to which was afterwards added dialogue, and long before the
advent, out of which it grew, of the native drama itself.

The progenitors of the Indo-European race, the Aryans--in Sanscrit
meaning Agriculturists--who crossed the Indus from Amoo, where they
dwelt near the Oxus, some two thousand years before Christ, were the
original ancestors and people of India.

The Aryan race (Hindus and Persians only speak of themselves as Aryans)
laid the foundation of the Grecian and Roman Mythology, the dark and
more sombre legends of the Scandinavian and the Teuton; and all derived
from the various names grouped round the Sun god, which in the lighter
themes the Aryans associated with the rising and the setting of the sun,
in all its heavenly glory, and with the sombre legends the coming of the
winter, and marking the difference between lightness and darkness.

In India the origin of dramatic entertainments has been attributed to
the sage Bharata (meaning an actor), who received, it is said, a
communication from the god Brahma to introduce them, as the latter had
received his knowledge of them from the Vedas. Bharata was also said to
be the "Father of dramatic criticism." Pantomimic scenes derived from
the heathen Mythology of Vishnu--a collection of poems and hymns on the
Aryan religion--are even now in India occasionally enacted by the Jatras
of the Bengalis and the Rasas of the provinces in the west, and, just as
their forefathers did ages and ages ago. An episode from the history of
the god Vishnu, in relation to his marriage with Laxmi, was a favourite
subject for the early Indian Drama. Of Vedic Mythology Professor Max
Mueller observes that in it "There are no genealogies, no settled
marriages between gods and goddesses. The father is sometimes the son,
the brother, the husband, and she who in one hymn is the mother, is in
another the wife. As the conceptions of the poet vary so varies the
nature of these gods."

The Hindoo dramatic writer, Babhavnti--the Indian
Shakespeare--introduced with success in one of his dramas, like in our
"Hamlet," "a play within a play," and much in a similar way as our early
dramatists used in their plays, the "dumb shows."

Between the native Tragedy and Comedy, as in China, there was no
definite distinction, and, although both contained some of the best and
noblest sentiments, yet the racial philosophy of caste enters greatly
into the construction of each.

In the Hindoo Mythology we have prototypes of the gods of the Egyptian,
Grecian, and Roman Mythologies. The god Vishnu, who, in Aryan Mythology,
is the wind and "Traverses the heavens in three strides," is the
greatest of all heathen deities. His dwelling-place was "The aerial
mountains, where the many horned and swiftly moving cattle abide." In
Grecian Mythology Hermes or Mercury took on some of the characteristics
of Vishnu.

In the Eleusinian Mysteries of the Greeks, the signs and symbols that
marked the worship of Vishnu by the Aryans, are apparent; and in the
British Museum the scenes of the vases of the Hamilton collection agree
closely with the Sacti rites of Hindustan.

After having briefly noticed and introduced Vishnu or Hermes to the
notice of the reader, we will now take another of the Aryan
deities--See-Va, the Wine god. This myth was the Dionysus, or Bacchus,
of the Greeks, and the expedition of this "immortal" through the world
to instruct mankind in agriculture, is likened as well as the god
himself by the Egyptians to their deity Osiris--the god of the Nile. The
worship of See-Va, Bacchus, or Osiris extended over Asia Minor, Greece,
and Italy.

The visit and advent of the Wine or Pleasure god Bacchus to India, with
his accompanying train of sylvan and rural deities, and nymphs, is
supposed to have conquered the Hindoos, and taught them civilization,
besides the cultivation of the vine. Strange to relate that when
Alexander and his army reached the present Cabul they found ivy and
wild vines (both sacred to Bacchus) growing in abundance, and they were
met by processions dressed in parti-coloured dresses, playing on drums
like the Bacchic festivals of Greece and Lower Asia of that time.

Female parts were acted by women, but it was not a general custom; and
the Clown of the piece was always a Brahma, or if not, at any rate a
pupil of Brahma.

Also among the minor characters was the _Vita_, "the accomplished
companion," a part sometimes played by men and sometimes by women.
Probably in this in the latter instance we have the origin of the
Columbine and Soubrette part in after years of the European stage as the
term "accomplished companion," would equally apply to both. It is only a
surmise, yet history as we know is continually repeating itself--even in
Soubrette parts, and in more senses than one.

Of scenic displays that it possessed there was little or none, though
the exits and entrances to the stage had probably some device to denote
them. What they possessed in the way of properties it is more than
useless to speculate, as, whatever could be said, could only be
conjectural. In dressing their parts propriety in costume, and in
adhering to the habits of the Indian Drama, seems to have been observed
with some show of consistency.

The Chinese Drama also arose from the Hindoo developing itself as time
rolled on from Pantomimes and ballets. A very ancient Pantomime is said
to have been symbolical of the conquest of China by Wou Wang. Others
were on subjects of the Harvest, War, and Peace; whilst many were only
of an obscure nature. With the rise and progress of the native drama
about five hundred years before Christ Pantomimes fell into disrepute.

It is interesting to note that one of the penal codes of the Celestial
Empire was, that those who wrote plays with vicious, or immoral
tendencies, should stay in "purgatory" as long as their plays were
performed. This precept was all right in theory, but in practice it was
more honoured in the breach than in the observance, as amongst the whole
of the Celestial dramatic writers only one in about ten thousand seems
to have conformed to this rule.

The dramatic writers of China duly observed the question of rank and
priority, and just as much as the native Hindoo writers observed that of
the various phases of caste.

Plays were divided into acts and scenes, and occasionally were prefixed
by a prologue. Performances took sometimes a single day, and favourite
plays oftentimes longer.

The Japanese type of drama seems to have originally evolved itself from
that of the Chinese, though its singing, dancing, historical, and
Pantomimical displays are, of course, purely native.

A native of Japan, though of Chinese descent, Hadu Kawatsa, at the
close of the 6th century (A.D.) gave dramatic entertainments in Japan.
The Japanese claim for the Pantomimical dance Sambaso as a preventative
of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions; and this dance, it is said, that
within recent years, is used as a prelude to dramatic entertainments.

Isono Zenji is thought to have been the originator of the Japanese
Drama, but her performances were more those of the _Mima_--dancing and
posturing.

In the seventeenth century Saruwaka Kanzaburo introduced the drama
proper into Japan by the erection, in 1624, of a theatre, and nearly
fifty years later than the first permanent theatre that was erected
(1576) in England.

Popular historical subjects were chosen for the plays, though the names
of the characters were transformed. Fancy plays, operas, ballets, which
in the latter women appeared, became also very popular.

Within sight of the closing years of the last century (the nineteenth),
Japanese actors were more or less under a ban when the same was happily
removed.

Siam was content with the Indian style of dramatic and Pantomimic
entertainments. Theatrical performances were also slightly known--though
no regular type of drama is known--amongst the South Sea Islanders, the
Peruvians, the Aztecs, the Zulus, and the Fijis, the two last named
having a similar version of our popular Pantomime subject, "Jack and the
Beanstalk."

The Egyptians possessed no regular type of drama, yet in both the Books
of Job and Ruth the dramatic element is strongly marked. At the rustic
festivals of the native gods, as in Greece and Italy, there was,
however, the dramatic elements of the union of song, dance, and
Pantomime, and we are told that the priests not only studied music, but
also taught the art to others. Again in the rites of the dead the
Mysteries of the sepulture over the transmigration of souls, the
dramatic element entered largely into these mystic rites and
celebrations. Amongst the Pagan Greeks, as I have previously stated, and
the Romans, we learn of similar celebrations, carried out with great
pomp and ceremony, such as the apotheosis of the soul departing from its
earthly to its heavenly abode.




CHAPTER IV.

"Dancing," _i.e._ Pantomime--Grecian Dancing and Pantomimic
Scenes--Aristotle--Homer--Dances common to both Greeks and Romans.


In tracing the History of Pantomime it becomes a matter of considerable
difficulty, and, as Baron, in his _Lettres sur la Danse_, observes that
when the word Dancing occurs in an old author, that it should always be
translated by "gesticulation," "declamation," or "Pantomime." When we
read that an actress "danced" her part well in the tragedy of Medea,
that a carver cut up food dancing, that Heligobalus and Caligula
"danced" a discourse for an audience of state, we are to understand that
they--actress, carver, and emperor--declaimed, gesticulated, made
themselves understood in a language without words. Acting is also
oftentimes confounded with dancing, and it is, therefore, manifestly
impossible to distinguish now one from the other.

"The Greeks," mentions Butteux, applied the term "Dancing" to all
measured movements, even to military marching. They danced anywhere and
everywhere; and we are told that both their limbs and bodies spoke.

Cybele was supposed by the Greeks to have taught dancing on Mount Ida to
the Corybantes, and they also say that it was in their country that
Apollo revealed the Terpsichorean Art, and that of Music and Poetry.

After all this, it is not very surprising that they make claim for the
innovation of Pantomime. This, of course, we know is different, as we
have seen that, from time immemorial Pantomimic scenes and dances have
been represented. Cassiodorus attributes its institution to Philistion;
Athenaens assigns it to Rhodamanthus, or to Palamedes.

With the Greeks, Pantomimes became very popular, and they were
distinguished by various names. Before they began their Tragedies the
Greeks used to give a Pantomimic display. The principal Pantomimists
were known as _Ethologues_, meaning painters of manners. One of the most
celebrated of these Mimes was Sophron of Syracuse. In depicting the
conduct of man so faithfully, the Pantomimes of the Greek Mimes served
to teach and inculcate useful moral lessons. The moral philosophy of the
Mime, Sophron, was so pure that Plato kept a book of his poems under his
pillow when on his death-bed. Besides these Moralities, as they were
termed, there were, in addition, light pieces of a farcical kind, in the
portrayal of which the Mimes were equally as successful as in the other
species.

The dancing of the Greeks was an actual language, in which all
sentiments and passages were interpreted. By the aid of the
Terpsichorean Art, Professor Desrat says, "That the Greeks, a nation of
heroes, trained themselves in the art of hand-to-hand combat."

"Dancing," says another writer, "and imitative acting in the lower
stages of civilization are identical, and in the sacred dances of
ancient Greece we may trace the whole Dramatic Art of the modern world.
The Spartans practised dancing as a gymnastic exercise, and made it
compulsory upon all children from the age of five."

And we are also told that religious processions went with song and dance
(and, of course, Pantomime), to the Egyptian temples; the Cretan chorus
sang hymns to the Greek gods; David danced in procession before the Ark
of the Covenant; and that we are to "Praise the Lord with the sound of
the trumpet, praise Him with the psaltery and the harp; praise Him with
the timbrel and the _dance_."

Aristotle speaks of Mimetic dances three hundred years before the
Augustan era. He also says that dancers want neither poetry or music, as
by the assistance of measure and cadence only they can imitate human
manners, actions, and passions.

Again, "Homer, describing the employment of the Delian priestesses, or
Nuns, of the order of St. Apollo of Delos, that they were great adepts
in the Art of Mimicry, and that part of the entertainment which they
afforded to the numerous people of different nations; who formed their
congregations was, as the poet expresses it, from their _being skilled
to imitate the voices and the pulsation or measure of all nations, and
so exactly was their song adapted that every man would think he himself
was singing_."

Homer also mentions a dance invented for Ariadne. In the midst of the
dancers, there were two dancers who sang the adventures of Daedalus,
supplementing their singing by gestures, and explaining in Pantomime the
subject of the whole performance.

The Pyrrhic dance of the Greeks was a sort of military Pantomime. The
Greeks had several kinds of Pyrrhic dances, the names of which varied
with the character of the performance.

    The Hyplomachia imitated a fight with shields.
    The Skiamachia was a battle with shadows,
    The Monomachia was an imitation of single combat.

Some of the Mimetic dances common to both Greeks and Romans were The
Loves of Adonis and Venus, the Exploits of Ajax, the Adventures of
Apollo, the Rape of Ganymede, the Loves of Jupiter and Danae, the Birth
of Jupiter, Hector, the Rape of Europa, the Labours of Hercules,
Hercules Mad, the Graces, Saturn devouring his Children, the Cybele in
honour of Cybele, the Cyclops, the Sorrows of Niobe, the Tragic End of
Semele, the Wars of the Titans, the Judgment of Paris, Daphne pursued by
Apollo, the Bucolic Dance, and the Dance of Flowers.




CHAPTER V.

Thespis--The Progress of Tragedy and Comedy--Aeschylus--The
Epopee--Homer--Sophocles--Euripides--Grecian Mimes--The First Athenian
Theatre--Scenery and Effects.


When Thespis first pointed out the tragic path, and when (as Horace
tells us in his Odes) that "The inventor of the Art carried his vagrant
players on a cart," by his introduction of a new personage, who relieved
the chorus, or troop of singers, by reciting some part of a well-known
history, or fable, which gave time for the chorus to rest. All that the
actors repeated between the songs of the chorus was called an episode,
or additional part, consisting often of different adventures, which had
no connexion with each other. Thus Pantomime, the song, and the dance,
which were at first the only performances, became gradually and
insensibly a necessary and ornamental part of the drama.

From this time, the actor, or reciter, was more attended to than the
chorus; however, his part was executed, and it had the powerful charms
of novelty to recommend it, and quickly obscured the lustre of the
chorus, whose songs were now of a different nature, insomuch that the
original subject of them, the praise of Bacchus, was by degrees either
slightly mentioned, or totally passed over and forgotten; the priests,
who we may suppose for a long time presided over the whole, were alarmed
at so open a contempt of the deity, and unanimously exclaimed, that this
was nothing to Bacchus; the contempt grew into a kind of proverbial
saying, and as such is handed down to us.

From the origin of Tragedy and Comedy, and to the days of Thespis, and
from this time to that of Aeschylus, all is doubt, conjecture, and
obscurity; neither Aristotle, nor any other ancient writer, gives us the
least insight into the state and progress of the Greek Drama; the names
of a few, and but a few, tragedians, during this dark period, are handed
down to us; such were Epigenes, the Sicyonion, and Pratinas, who wrote
fifty-two plays, thirty-two of which are said to be satirical. After
Thespis, came his scholar Phrynicus, who wrote nine tragedies; for one
of which, we are told, he was fined fifty drachmas, because he had made
it (an odd reason) too deep, and too affecting; there was another, also
named Phrynicus, author of two tragedies: to these must be added
Alcaeus, Phormus, and Choeritas, together with Cephisodorus, an
Athenian, who wrote the "Amazon," and Apollophanes, supposed to have
been the author of a tragedy named "Daulis," though Suidas is of another
opinion. Tragedy had, during the lives of these writers, probably made
but a slow progress, and received but very little culture and
improvement; when at length the great Aeschylus arose, who, from this
rude and undigested chaos, created as it were a new world in the system
of letters.

Poets, and perhaps epic poets, there might have been before Homer (the
latter, who, in all probability, lived within fifty years of the Fall of
Troy--1250 B.C.). Dramatic writers there certainly were before Aeschylus
the former notwithstanding, we may, with the utmost propriety, style the
inventor and father of heroic poetry, and the latter of the ancient
drama, which, before his time, does not appear to have had any
particular form but that of Pantomime, song, and the union of song and
dance. _Aeschylus first introduced dialogue_, that most essential part
of tragedy, and by the addition of the second personage, threw the whole
fable into action, and restored the chorus to its ancient dignity.

Aeschylus having, like a tender parent, endowed his darling child with
every mental accomplishment, seemed resolved that no external ornaments
should be wanting to render her universally amiable; he clothed her,
therefore, in the most splendid habit, and bestowed upon her everything
that Art could produce, to heighten and improve her charms. Aeschylus,
who being himself author, actor, and manager, took upon him the whole
conduct of the drama, and did not neglect any part of it; he improved
the scenery and decorations, brought his actors into a well constructed
theatre, raised his heroes on the _cothurnus_, or buskin, invented the
masks, and introduced splendid habits with long trains, that gave an air
of majesty and dignity to the performers.

From the time when Tragedy began to assume a regular form, we find her
closely following the steps of epic poetry; all the parts of _epopee_,
or heroic poem, may be traced in tragedy, though, as Aristotle observes,
all the parts of tragedy are not to be found in the _epopee_; whence the
partisans of the stage with some reason conclude, that perfection in the
former is more difficult to be attained than in the latter. Without
entering into a dispute, we may venture, however, to say that from Homer
the tragedians drew the plan, construction, and conduct of their fables,
and not unfrequently, the fable itself; to him they applied for
propriety of manners, character, sentiment, and diction.

From this era then, we are to consider Tragedy as an elegant and noble
structure, built according to the rules of art, symmetry, and
proportion; whose every part was in itself fair, firm, and compact--and
at the same time contributed to the beauty, utility, and duration of the
whole edifice.

Sophocles and Euripides carefully studied the plan laid down by
Aeschylus, and by their superior genius and judgment, improved it in a
short time to its highest state of perfection, from which it gradually
declined to the rise of the Roman Drama.

Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides were the three great tragic poets;
and from the works of these three illustrious writers, and from them
alone, we must draw all our knowledge of the ancient Greek Tragedy.

Comedy, like Tragedy, owes its origin to the union of music, song,
dance, and Pantomime; Tragedy to the dithyrambick, and Comedy to the
phallica; and each of them (emulating Pantomime), began to form
themselves into dramatic imitations; each studied to adopt a measure
suited to their purpose:--Tragedy, the more lofty, chose the tetrameter;
and comedy, which aimed at familiarity, the iambic. But, as the style of
tragedy improved, Nature herself, says Aristotle, directed the writers
to abandon the capering tetrameter, and to embrace that measure which
was most accommodated to the purposes of dialogue; whence the iambic
became the common measure of both Tragedy and Comedy.

Sophocles brought on a third actor, which number was not exceeded in the
Greek tragedies during the same scene. Horace alludes to this, "_nec
quarta loqui persona laboret_," (Let not a fourth person strive to
speak): but it was not observed in comedy. Players of second parts were
obliged to speak so low as not to drown the voice of the chief actor.
Tyrants were always played by subalterns. The women were only dancers
(and Pantomimists). Female parts were performed by eunuchs.

On the Grecian stage, those performers who devoted themselves entirely
to the Art of Miming originally came from Sicily and southern Italy,
though the exact period is difficult to determine with any degree of
certainty.

The figures of tragic or comic actors were known by the long and strait
sleeves which they wore. The servants in comedy, below the dress with
strait sleeves, had a short cassock with half-sleeves. That the
characters might be distinguished (a difficulty in this respect arising
from the size of the theatres) parasites carried a short truncheon; the
rural deities, shepherds, and peasants, the crook; heralds and
ambassadors, the _caduceus_; kings, a long, straight sceptre; heroes, a
club, etc. The tunic of tragic actors descended to the heels, and was
called _palla_. They generally carried a long staff or an erect sceptre.
They who represented old men, leaned upon a long and crooked staff.

The first Greek theatre at Athens (says Fosbroke, in his "Antiquities,")
was a temporary structure of boards, removed after the performances were
closed. This fashion continued till the erection of the theatre of
Bacchus, at Athens, which served as a model for the others. The Greek
theatre was no more than a concave sweep, scooped out of the hollow side
of a hill, generally facing the sea. The sweep was filled with seats,
rising above each other, and ascended by staircases, placed like the
_radii_ of a circle. This semi-circular form was adopted not merely for
convenience of vision, but for an aid to the sound. This range for
spectators was called the _coilon_ or hollow. The area below was the
_conistra_, or pit. There was no superstructure for a gallery, but
around the rim of the building were porticos, by which the spectators
entered, and whither they could retire, if it rained. The portico just
about the highest corridor, or lobby, was denominated the _cercys_, and
used by the women. Where is now the orchestra, was a platform, called
by that name; and here, among the Greeks, were stationed the musicians;
chorus and Mimes; among the Romans, the Emperor, Senate, and other
persons of quality. Seven feet above the orchestra, and eleven above the
_conistra_, or pit, was the front stage, or proscenium, upon which stood
an altar to Apollo. Here the principal actors performed, and the site of
the altar was devoted to the dances (of the Mimes) and songs of the
chorus. The part called the _scena_ was in line with the ornamental
columns, upon the sides of the stage.

The ancient scenery at first consisted of mere boughs, but afterwards of
tapestry, not painted canvas. The Greek stage consisted of three parts,
the _scena_, across the theatre, upon the line of the curtain in our
theatres; the proscenium, where the actors performed; and the
post-scenium, the part behind the house, before-mentioned. To form parts
of the scenes there were prisms of framework, turning upon pivots, upon
each face of which was strained a distinct picture, one for tragedy,
consisting of large buildings, with columns, statues, and other
corresponding ornaments; a second face, with houses, windows, and
balconies, for comedy; a third applied to farce, with cottages,
grottoes, and rural scenes. There were the _scenae versatiles_ of
Servius. Besides these, there were _scenae ductiles_, which drew
backwards and forwards, and opened a view of the house, which was built
upon the stage, and contained apartments for machinery, or retirement
for the actors. As to the patterns of the scenes, in comedy, the most
considerable building was in the centre; that on the right side was a
little less elevated, and that on the left generally represented an inn.
In the satirical pieces they had always a cave in the middle, a wretched
cabin on the right, and on the left an old ruined temple, or some
landscape. In these representations perspective was observed for
Vitruvius remarks (C. 8) that the rules of it were invented and
practised from the time of Aeschylus, by a painter named Agararchus, who
has even left a treatise upon it. After the downfall of the Roman
Empire, these decorations of the stage were neglected, till Peruzzi, a
Siennese, who died in 1536, revived them.

There were three entries in front, and two on the sides; the middle
entry (termed the Royal door) was always that of the principal actor;
thus, in tragedy, it was commonly the gate of a palace. Those on the
right and left were destined to the second-part players, and the two
others, on the sides, one to people from the country, the other to those
from the harbour, or any public place.

Pollux informs us, that there were trap-doors for ghosts, furies, and
the infernal deities. Some under the doors, on one side, introduced the
rural deities, and on the other the marine. The ascents or descents were
managed by cords, wheels, and counter-weights. Of these machines none
were more common than those which descended from heaven in the end of
the play, in which the gods came to extricate the poet in the
_denouement_. The kinds were chiefly three; some conveyed the performer
across the theatre in the air; by others, the gods descended on the
stage; and a third contrivance, elevated, or supported in the air,
persons who seemed to fly, from which accidents often happened. (It is
from this that the well-known phrase "_Deus ex machina_" has its
origin.) As the ancient theatres were larger than ours, and unroofed,
there was no wheel-work aloft, but the performer was elevated by a sort
of crane, of which the beam was above the stage; and turning upon
itself, whilst the counter-weight made the actor descend or ascend,
caused him to describe curves, jointly composed of the circular motion
of the crane, and the vertical ascent. The _anapesmata_ were cords for
the sudden appearance of furies, when fastened to the lowest steps; and
to the ascension of rivers, when attached to the stage. The
_ceraunoscopium_ was a kind of moveable tower, whence Jupiter darted
lightning, supposed to be the Greek fire, as in Ajax Oielus. The machine
for thunder (_bronton_) was a brazen vase, concealed under the stage, in
which they rolled stones. Festus calls it the Claudian thunder, from
Claudius Pulcher, the inventor. The most dreadful machines were,
however, the _pegmata_ (a general term also for all the machines), which
first consisted of scaffolds in stories, &c. These first exhibited
criminals fighting at the top, and then, dropping to pieces,
precipitated them to the lower story, to be torn to pieces by wild
beasts. Sometimes they were for vomiting flames, &c. The _theologium_
was a place more elevated than the stage, where the gods stood and
spoke, and the machines which held them rested.

The seats of the spectators were divided into stories, each containing
seven rows of seats, with two passages (_praecinctiones_) around them
above and below. Small staircases divided the seats into sections,
called _cunei_, and ended in a gate at the top, which communicated with
passages (the _vomitoriae_) for admission.




CHAPTER VI.

Roman Theatres--Description--"Deadheads"--Pantomime in Italy--Livius
Andronicus--_Fabulae Atellanae_--Extemporal Comedy--Origin of the
Masque, Opera, and Vaudeville--Origin of the term
Histrionic--Etruscans--Popularity of Pantomime in Italy--Pantomimists
banished by Trajan--Nero as a Mime--Pylades and Bathyllus--Subjects
chosen for the Roman Pantomimes--The Ballet--The _Mimi_ and
_Pantomimi_--_Archimimus_--Vespasian--Harlequin--"Mr. Punch"--Zany, how
the word originated--Ancient Masks--Lucian, Cassiodorus, and Demetrius
in praise of Pantomime--A celebrated _Mima_--Pantomimes denounced by
early writers--The purity of the English stage contrasted with that of
the Grecian and Roman--Female parts on the Grecian and Roman stages--The
principal Roman _Mimas_--The origin of the Clown of the early English
Drama.


The Roman theatres (continues Fosbroke) were of a similar D form. Two
lofty arched doorways entered into the pit. In front of the stage, which
was very shallow, was a pew-like orchestra. The proscenium was very
narrow, and instead of a drop scene was the _elisium_, a house, narrow,
with a kind of bow window front in the centre, and a door on each side:
for Pollux says that a house with two stories formed part of the stage,
whence old women and panders used to look down and peep about them.
Within the house were apartments. Around the back of the stage was a
_porticus_. At Herculaneum, on a balustrade which divided the orchestra
from the stage, was found a row of statues, and on each side of the
_pulpitum_, an equestrian figure. Below the theatre (great and small)
was a large square constructed, says Vitruvius, for the reception of the
audience in bad weather. It consisted of Doric columns, around an open
area, forming an ample portico for this purpose, whilst under it were
arranged _cellae_, or apartments, amongst which were a soap manufactory,
oil mill, corn mill, and prison. An inner _logia_ was connected with a
suite of apartments. There was also an _exedra_, or recess.

Among the Romans, theatrical approbation was signified by an artificial
musical kind of noise, made by the audience to express satisfaction.
There were three species of applause denominated from the different
noises made in them, viz.: _Bombus_, _Imbrius_, and _Testae_.

First, a confused din, made either by the hands or mouth. The second and
third, by beating on a sort of sounding vessel placed in the theatres
for that purpose. Persons were instructed to give applause with
skill--and there were even masters who professed to teach the art. The
proficients in this way let themselves out for hire to the poets,
actors, &c., and were so disposed as to support a loud applause. These
they called _Laudicena_. At the end of the play, a loud peal of applause
was expected, and even asked of the audience either by the chorus or by
the person who spoke last. The formula was "_Spectatore Claudite_," or
"_Valete et Plaudite_." The applauders were divided into _Chori_, and
disposed in theatres opposite to each other, like the choristers in
cathedrals, so that there was a kind of concert of applause. The free
admission tickets were small ivory death's heads, and specimens of these
are to be seen in the Museum of Naples. From this custom, it is stated,
that we derive our word "Deadhead," as denoting one who has a free
entrance to places of amusement.

With the dawn of the Roman Empire, Pantomime, in Italy, is first
authentically mentioned. The Emperor Augustus always displayed great
favour to the Art, and even by some writers he has been credited with
being the originator of Pantomime. This, of course, as we have seen, is
impossible, and to use a familiar and trite saying, the Pantomimic Art
is "as old as the hills" themselves. Again, Bathyllus and Pylades (both
freed slaves, the former born in Cilicia, and the latter came from
Alexandria), and Hylas, the principal exponents of Pantomime during the
reign of Augustus, have also been credited with the honour of
originating Pantomime.

The early Roman entertainments only consisted of the military and sacred
dances, and the scenes in the circus. With the advent of the arts of
Greece the austerity hitherto practised by the Romans, which had arisen,
says Duray, "Much more from poverty than conviction," for "Two or three
generations had sufficed to change a city which had only known meagre
festivities and rustic delights into the home of revelry and pleasure."

With the Romans, in their Pantomimic entertainments, the whole gamut of
the emotions were gone through.

When the Greek drama was brought into Rome by Livius Andronicus, the
_Fabulae Atellanae_, or _Laudi Osci_--derived from the town of Atella,
in Campania, between Capua and Naples--was still employed to furnish the
Interludes, and just in a similar way as the _Satyra_ Extemporal
Interludes supplied the Grecian stage. None of these Atellan Farces
have been committed to us, but Cicero, in a letter to his friend
Papyrius Paetus, speaks of them as the "More delicate burlesque of the
old Atellan Farces." From them also, we derive the Extemporal Comedy, or
_Comedia del' Arte_ of Italy (afterwards to be noted), with its
characters, Harlequin, Clown, Pierrot, and the like, associated with
English and Italian Pantomime, and the progenitor also of all those
light forms of entertainment known as the Masque, the Opera, and the
Vaudeville. On English dramatic literature the Italian Extemporal
Comedies and their Pantomimical characters have also had a considerable
amount of influence.

Livy mentions that actors were sent for (_circa_ 364 B.C.) from Etruria,
who, without verses or any action expressive of verses, danced not
ungracefully, after the Tuscan manner to the flute. In process of time
the Roman youth began to imitate these dancers intermixing raillery with
unpolished verses, their gestures corresponding with the sense of the
words. Thus were these plays received at Rome, and being improved and
refined by frequent performance the Roman actors acquired the name of
_Histriones_, from the Etruscan _Hister_, meaning a dancer or a stage
player. (From this we obtain our words histrion and histrionic). But
their dialogue did not consist of unpremeditated and coarse jests in
such rude verses as were used by the _Fescennini_, but of satires,
accompanied with music set to the flute, recited with suitable gestures.
After satires, which had afforded the people subject of coarse mirth
and laughter, were, by this regulation, reduced to form and acting, by
degrees became an art, the Roman youth left it to players by profession,
and began, as formerly, to act farces at the end of their regular
pieces. These dramas were called _Exodia_, and were generally woven with
the _Atellanae_ Comedies. These were borrowed from the Osci, and were
always acted by the Roman youth. Tacitus speaks of _Atellanae_ Comedies
written in the spirit and language of the Osci having been acted in his
time.

It is thought that the Etruscans possessed histories, poems, and dramas,
and, if these, then certainly they knew the Pantomimic Art, out of
which, in all probability, their dramatic entertainments grew. To the
Etruscans the Romans owe their early civilization.

The Etruscan era is supposed to have commenced about 1044 B.C., and we
are told that the Etruscans shared with the Greeks, and the Phoenicians,
the maritime supremacy of the Mediterranean. In the sepulchral chambers
of the Necropolis of Tarquinii, which extends for many miles, there are
several scenes painted in the archaic style by the Etruscans,
representing the Chase, the Circus, and Dancing Girls.

Soon after its innovation among the Romans, Pantomime spread all over
Italy and the provinces. So attractive did it become in Rome, and so
popular, that Tiberius issued a decree forbidding the knights and nobles
to frequent their houses of entertainment, or to be seen walking in the
streets with them. Trajan also oppressed and banished the Pantomimists.
Under Caligula, however, they were received with great favour, and
Aurelius made them priests of Apollo. Nero, who carried everything to
the extremity of foolishness, was not content in patronising the
Pantomimes, but must needs assist, and appear himself, as a _Mimi_. Here
again, in Nero, another claimant as the author of Pantomime has been put
forward.

"So great (observes Gaston Vuillier, in his 'History of Dancing,') was
the admiration for Pylades and Bathyllus that the theatrical supporters
clothed themselves in different liveries, and broils in the public
streets were of frequent occurrence." "The rivalries of Pylades and
Bathyllus," says De Laulnaye, "occupied the Romans as much as the
gravest affairs of state. Every citizen was a Bathyllian or a Pyladian."
Augustus reproved Pylades on one occasion for his quarrels with
Bathyllus. The Mime retorted, "It is well for you that the people are
engrossed by our disputes; their attention is thus diverted from your
actions." A bold retort, but it shows how important these Mimes were.
The banishment of Pylades brought about an insurrection, and the Emperor
had to recall him.

Cassius attributes the disgrace of Pylades to the intrigues of
Bathyllus, Suetonius to his effrontery; for on one occasion, when acting
Hercules, annoyed by the criticism of the spectators, he tore off his
mask, and shouted to them: "Fools, I am acting a madman." They thought
his gestures too extravagant. Another time he shot off arrows amongst
the spectators. Amongst other privileges extended by the Emperor
Augustus to the _Mimis_ was being exempt from magisterial control and
immunity from military serving.

The subjects chosen for the Roman Pantomimes, like those of the Grecian
mysteries, from which they doubtless were borrowed, were of a
Mythological description, and they were of such a nature that the
audience could follow them easily, even if they were not already
previously acquainted with them. Between the Roman Pantomime, and the
Western _ballet d'action_, there is hardly any difference. The Romans
always liked to see their stages well peopled; and to help in the action
of their Pantomimes, a chorus accompanied with music, formed part of the
entertainment. The _Mimis and Mimas_, like the ballet of the present
day, provided the dances in addition to their Pantomimic Art of posing
and posturing.

Mr. Isaac Disraeli, in his work, "Curiosities of Literature," edited by
the late Earl of Beaconsfield, thus distinguishes between the _Mimi_ and
the _Pantomimi_ of the Ancients. The _Mimi_ were an impudent race of
buffoons who excelled in mimicry, and like our domestic fools, were
admitted into convivial parties to entertain the guests. Their powers
enabled them to perform a more extraordinary office; for they appear to
have been introduced into funerals to mimic the person, and even the
language of the deceased. Suetonius describes an _archimimus_
accompanying the funeral of Vespasian. This _archimimus_ performed his
part admirably, not only representing the person, but imitating,
according to custom, _ut est mos_, the manners and language of the
living Emperor. He contrived a happy stroke at the prevailing foible of
Vespasian, when he enquired the cost of all this funeral pomp--"Ten
million of sesterces!" On this he observed that if they would give him
but a hundred thousand they might throw his body into the Tiber.

The _Pantomimi_ were quite of a different class. They were tragic
actors, and usually mute; they combined the arts of gesture, music, and
dances of the most impressive character. Their silent language has often
drawn tears by the pathetic emotions they excited; "Their very nod
speaks, their hands talk, and their fingers have a voice," says one of
their admirers.

These Pantomimists seem to have been held in great honour. The tragic
and the comic masks were among the ornaments of the sepulchral monuments
of an _Archmime_ and a _Pantomimi_. Montfaucon conjectures that they
formed a select fraternity.

The parti-coloured hero (Harlequin), with every part of his dress, has
been drawn out of the greatest wardrobe of antiquity; he was a Roman
Mime. Harlequin is described with his shaven head (_rasis capitibus_);
his sooty face (_fuligine faciem abducti_); his flat unshod feet,
(_planipedes_), and his patched coat of many colours, (_Mimi
centunculo_). Even _Pulcinello_, whom we familiarly call "Punch," may
receive, like other personages of no great importance, all his dignity
from antiquity; one of his Roman ancestors having appeared to an
antiquary's visionary eye in a bronze statue; more than one erudite
dissertation authenticates the family likeness; the nose long, prominent
and hooked; the staring goggle eyes; the hump at his back, and at his
breast; in a word, all the character which so strongly marks the Punch
race, as distinctly as whole dynasties have been featured by the
Austrian lip and the Bourbon nose.

The genealogy of the whole family is confirmed by the general term which
includes them all: in English, Zany; in Italian, _Zanni_; in the Latin,
_Sannio_; and a passage in "Cicero _De Oratore_," paints Harlequin and
his brother gesticulators after the life; the perpetual trembling motion
of their limbs, their ludicrous and flexible gestures, and all the
mimicry of their faces: "_Quid enim potest tam ridiculum quam Sannio
esse? Qui ore vultu, imitandis motibus, voce, denique corpore ridetur
ipso._" Lib II., Sect. 51. ("For what has more of the ludicrous than
Sannio? Who, with his mouth, his face, imitating every motion with his
voice, and, indeed, with all his body, provokes laughter.")

The Latin Sannio was changed by the Italians into (as Ainsworth
explains) Zanni, as, in words like Smyrna and Sambuco, they change the
s into z, which gives Zmyrna and Zambuco, and hence we derive our word
Zany. The word is, however, originally obtained from the Greek _Sannos_
(observes Quadrio), from whence the Latins derived their _Sannio_.

From the size of the ancient theatres it was not possible to notice the
visage of the actors, and this was one, but not the only reason, why
masks were adopted. The Ancients did not like a character to be
attempted, to which a proper appropriation was not annexed, and these
masks were so contrived, that the profile on one side exhibited chagrin,
and on the other serenity, or whatever other passion was most required.
The actor thus, according to the part he was playing, presented the side
of the mask best suited to the passage which he was reciting. The large
mouths of these masks were presumed to have contained some bronze
instrument suited to assist the voice, upon the principle of the
speaking trumpet; for the mask was wider, and the recitation in tragedy
much louder than in comedy, so that the voice might be heard all over
the theatre. The masks of the dancers were of regular features.

By some it has been contended that these masks covered both the head and
the shoulders under the supposed idea that when the head was thus
enlarged it would throw the whole body into symmetry when raised upon
stilts. It has, also, been argued that the masks for some of the
characters were made of gold-beaters skin, or some transparent substance
just covering the face so that the facial muscles could be seen through
it, and the eyes, mouth, and ears being left uncovered. These masks,
however, delineated very carefully the features of the character that
were to be represented. Something not unlike the huge Pantomime masks of
a hideous and frightful shape that we sometimes see in our present day
Pantomimes must have appeared, especially those that covered the head
and shoulders of the _Mimis_ in the days of the Romans. Those that were
just of the size of the face in all probability were fantastic and
picturesque; and the third and remaining species of mask made of a
transparent substance could hardly have been very effective.

Mr. Wright tells us, in his book on the Chester Mystery plays (which
work I shall again refer to later on), that masks were used in the
Mystery series of plays acted in England during the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries.

Julius Pollux is still more ample in his account of theatrical masks
used in Tragedy, Satyr, and Comedy. Niobe weeping, Medea furious, Ajax
astonished, and Hercules enraged. In Comedy, the slave, the parasite,
the clown, the captain, the old woman, the harlot, the austere old man,
the debauched young man, the prodigal, the prudent young woman, the
matron, and the father of a family, were all constantly characterised by
particular masks.

Lucian and the other writers of the Augustan era, have handed down to us
sufficient information to show how Pantomime in Rome was so highly
thought of. Cassiodorous, speaking of them, says:--"Men whose eloquent
hands had a tongue, as it were, on the tip of each finger--men who spoke
while they were silent, and knew how to make a recital without opening
their mouths--men, in short, whom Polyhymnia had formed in order to show
that there was no necessity for articulation in order to convey our
thoughts." Demetrius, a cynic philosopher, laughed at the Romans for
permitting so strange an entertainment; but having been, with much
difficulty, prevailed upon to be present at the representation of one of
them, he was confounded with wonder. The story represented was that of
Mars and Venus, the whole performed by a single actor, who described the
fable in _dumb show_. At length the philosopher, wrought up to the
highest pitch of admiration, exclaimed, "That the actor _had no occasion
for a tongue, he spoke so well with his hands_."

Of one Pontus, who had come on a visit to Nero, we are told that he was
present at a performance, in the course of which a favourite Mime gave a
representation of the Labours of Hercules. The Mime's gestures were so
precise that he could follow the action without the slightest
hesitation. Being struck by the performance, on taking leave he begged
Nero to give him the actor, explaining that there was a barbarous tribe
adjoining his dominions, whose language no one could learn, and that
Pantomime could express his intentions to them so faithfully by gestures
that they would at once understand.

The dress of the performers of Pantomime was made to reveal, and not to
conceal, their figures. After the second century women began to act in
their representations, and even down to the sixth century we find them
associating themselves with Pantomime, and mention is made of a
celebrated _Mima_, who was ultimately raised to the imperial throne.
Through the lewdness of the _Mimis_ and _mimas_ in Pantomime, their
dress, or rather lack of dress, Pantomimes were denounced, not only by
the early Christian writers, but also by some of the Pagan writers, like
Juvenal, as being very prejudicial to morality.

It has, however, always been a favourite topic of the Prynne's, the
Jeremy Collier's and the Dr. Style's, and such like opponents of the
theatre, to contrast the English stage with the purity of the Grecian
and Roman Theatres. Now, without stopping to enquire whether this has
any particular connection with the subject of their dissertations, or
whether it is not in fact quite irrelevant to the question, it is
impossible not to remark the crass ignorance which these assertions
display of the manners and customs of the theatres of either the Greeks
or the Romans. Without wearying the reader by entering into a long
discussion upon the subject, it will be sufficient to recall certain
passages in Aristophanes, Xenophon, Plautus, and Terence to induce them
to hesitate in assenting to such vague assertions of the purity of
either the Grecian or Roman dramatic writers. William Prynne, the
English Puritan writer, in his violent attack on the stage in the
"_Histrio-Mastix_" or "Players Scourge"--which book, by the way, for
some unfavourable comments therein on the Queen of Charles I., and the
ladies of her Court, for attending theatrical representations, was
debarred his rooms (he was a barrister), by the Court of Star Chamber,
sentenced to be imprisoned for life, fined L5,000, committed to the
Tower, placed in the pillory, both ears cut off, and his book burnt by
the common hangman; yet after undergoing all these pains and penalties,
he published a _recantation of all that he had previously written in his
"Histrio-Mastix_"--says "It seems that the Grecian actors did now and
then to refresh the spectators, bring a kind of cisterne on the stage,
wherein naked women did swim and bathe themselves between the acts and
scenes; which wicked, impudent, and execrable practice the holy father
Chrysostom doth sharpely and excellently declaime against."

Xenophon mentions the tale of "Bacchus and Ariadne," Pantomimically
played, and Martial tells us he saw the whole story of "Pasiphae,"
minutely represented on the stage of the _Mimis_, and Plautus, in his
epilogue to "Casina," has--

    "Nunc vos aequim est, manibus meritis,
    Meritam mercedem dare.
    Qui faxit, clam uxorem, ducat scortum
    Semper quod volet.
    Verum qui non manibus clare, quantum
    Potent, plauserit,
    Ei, pro scorto, supponetur hircus unctus nantea."

On the Roman stage female parts were represented in tragedy by men, is
ascertained (says Malone) by one of Cicero's letters to Atticus, and by
a passage in Horace. Horace mentions, however, a female performer called
Arbuscula, but as we find from his own authority men personated women on
the Roman stage, she was probably an _Emboliariae_. Servius calls her a
_Mima_, or one who danced in the Pantomimic dances, and which seems more
probable, as she is mentioned by Cicero, who says the part of Andromache
was played by a male performer on the very day Arbuscula also performed.

The principal Roman _Mimas_ were:--Arbuscula, Thymele, Licilia,
Dionysia, Cytheris, Valeria, and Cloppia.

In the satirical interludes of the Grecian stage, and the _Fabulae
Atellanae_ of the Roman theatres, the _Exodiarii_ and _Emboliariae_ of
the Mimes, were the remote progenitors (says Malone) of the Vice or
Devil, and the Clown of our English Mystery plays, the latter series of
plays being the origin of the drama of this country. The exact
conformity between our Clown and the _Exodiarii_ and _Emboliariae_ of
the Roman stage is ascertained by that passage in Pliny--"_Lucceia Mima
centum annis in scena pronuntiavit. Galeria, Copiola, Emboliariae,
reducta est in scenam: annum certissimum quartum agens_," is thus
translated by an English author, Philemon Holland, "Lucceia, a common
Vice in a play, followed the stage, and acted thereupon 100 yeeres. Such
another Vice that _plaied the foole, and made sporte between whiles in
interludes_, named Galeria Copiola, was brought to act upon the stage
when she was in the 104th yeere of her age." We shall, in another
chapter, return to the Vice, or Clown.




CHAPTER VII.

Introduction of the Roman Pantomimic Art into Britain--First English
reference to the word Pantomime--The fall of the Roman Empire--The
sacred play--Cornish Amphitheatres--Pantomimical and Lyrical elements in
the sacrifice of the Mass--Christian banishment of the
_Mimis_--Penalties imposed by the Church--St. Anthony on Harlequin and
Punch--Vandenhoff--what we owe to the _Mimis_.


With the advent of Julius Caesar and the conquest of Britain by the
Romans, about the year 52 B.C., we have, in all probability, the first
introduction of the Roman Pantomimic Art into this country. Inasmuch as
we have it upon the authority of history that Caesar travelled with his
Mimes, and it is, therefore, not improbable that they came into Britain
with him. England, then, during the occupancy of the Romans, must have
known the Dramatic Art, or else (as Dibdin observes) Pacuvius, Accius,
and Livius Andronicus were ignorant of it. Martial tells us that it did,
and so does Boadicea, so that we have not only Roman authorities for it,
but also British.

The word "Pantomime" could not, I may say here, have been Anglicised
earlier than sometime during the seventeenth century. Dr. Johnson's
earliest example is from "Hudibras"--

    "Not that I think those _Pantomimes_,
    Who vary action with the times,
    Are less ingenious in their art
    Than those who duly act one part."

Bacon and Ben Jonson use the Latin _Pantomimi_--"Here be certain
_Pantomimi_ that will represent the voices of players." Again in the
"Masque of Love's Triumph," etc., 1630, "After the manner of the old
_Pantomimi_ they dance over a distracted Comedy of Love."

The fall of the Roman Empire and the progress of Christianity in Europe
sounded the death knell of Paganism and its attributes, of which
Pantomime was deemed to be one, owing to the bad odour in which this
form of entertainment had got to during the last days of the Empire.
Notwithstanding this the church was only too glad to avail itself of
Pantomime as a vehicle to portray before the world at large, and in
order to turn attention to the great moral truths to be deduced from the
death of Him on Calvary Hill. These exhibitions of religious subjects,
in the form of _tableaux vivants_, took place in the churches, and,
having regard to the sacred edifices in which they were given, they
were, especially in the beginning, I conjecture, performed in dumb show,
without any dialogue. Afterwards dialogue was introduced, and they began
to be, not only held in the churches, but also in the church-yards, the
streets, and in booths.

It is true the sacred play was not a new institution, as one is said to
be mentioned about the time of the Fall of Jerusalem. In Cornwall, plays
were given in the ancient times in the open air, after the fashion of
the Roman Amphitheatre, with the dialogue in the Cymric tongue.
Pantomimical performances might also have been given in those open-air
theatres by the Romans.

Perhaps no better example of the early Sacred Drama I can give, and
which is still with us, and performed daily, is the sacrifice of the
Mass in all Roman Catholic Churches throughout the length and breadth of
the world. In the Mass we have a dramatic action _pantomimically_
presented, in part aided by lyrical and epical elements. I will not,
however, pursue this portion of my subject further, save than to add
that at the Catholic Churches' festivals, especially during Holy Week or
Passion Week, what I have mentioned of the Mass becomes at these times
marked in even a greater degree.

With the decline and fall of the Roman Empire, the _Mimis_ became
wanderers on the face of the earth, only appearing at festivals and the
like, when they were wanted, and returning to their haunts as
mysteriously as they came.

In the fourth century A.D. they were excluded from the benefit of the
rites of the Church, and even those who visited their entertainments,
instead of churches, on the Sundays and holidays, were excommunicated.
The Theodosian creed provided that the actors were not to have the
sacraments administered to them save when death was imminent, and then
only that, in case of recovery, their calling should be renounced.

In the second century one of the Fathers of the Church wrote a special
treatise against plays (_Tertulian De Spectaculis_), in which he asks
those who will not renounce them "Whether the God of truth, who hates
all falsehood, can be willing to receive into His kingdom those whose
features and hair, whose age and sex, whose sighs and laughter, love and
anger, are all feigned. He promises them a tragedy of their own when, in
the day of Judgment, they shall be consigned to everlasting suffering."

However, the church was not always against the stage, even in those
early times, as St. Thomas Aquinas says that "The office of the player
as being serviceable for the enlivenment of men, and as not being
blameworthy if the player leads an upright life." Both Saints Thomas
Aquinas and Anthony supported the stage, the latter only stipulating
that the character of Harlequin should not be represented by a
clergyman, nor that Punch should be exhibited in church.

It is one of the most remarkable things that, despite the bitterness,
hostility, and deadly enmity that has been levelled at the stage, and
its players termed "Rogues and Vagabonds" from time immemorial, how it
has lived through it all. In connection with this how the lines of that
great actor, Vandenhoff, occurs to me, a few of which, with the reader's
permission, I subjoin.

    "The drama's now a great established fact,
    That can't be blink'd, ignored how'er attack'd
    By vain abuse or angry prejudice;
    The time's gone by when _playing was a vice_;
    When bigots mark'd the actor with a ban,
    (Tho' saintly crowds to hear his accents ran),
    Denied him sacred rite and hallowed grave--
    Filching from God the soul he made to save--
    And, for the pleasure which his life had giv'n
    On earth, refused him dead, a place in heav'n.
    No! wiser days bring gentler feelings in,
    And 'Nature's touches makes the whole world kin'."

By degrees the _Mimis_, or mummers, with their fellows, spread
themselves all over Europe. The humbler of the craft, in fact it might
be said of them all, as Othello's occupation had (for them) long since
been gone, strolled from castle to castle, from village to town, and
earning their livelihood as best they could. To these wandering
Bohemians we owe such traditions of the drama that survived with them
into succeeding ages; and to them also we are indebted for keeping alive
by inculcating unto others the Art of _Pantomimus_, when in the heyday
of its popularity in the Roman Empire.




CHAPTER VIII.

Pantomime in the English Mystery or Miracle Plays and Pageants--A
retrospect of the Early Drama--Mysteries on Biblical events--Chester,
Coventry, York, and Towneley Mystery Plays--Plays in Churches--Traces of
the Mystery Play in England in the Nineteenth Century--Mystery Plays on
the Continent--The Chester series of Plays--The Devil or Clown and the
_Exodiarii_ and _Emboliariae_ of the Ancient Mimes.


It is presumed that, not only were the early sacred plays acted in
dumb-show, but that the Miracle or Mysteries of Religion series of
plays--which grew out of the sacred play--also the Pageants in the
beginning, and for long afterwards were acted in this wise. Percy, in
his "Reliques of Ancient English Poetry," also takes this view. He
says:--"They were (the Mysteries) probably a kind of _dumb show_,
intermingled, it may be, with a few short speeches, at length they grew
into regular scenes of connected dialogues, formally divided into acts
and scenes." Colley Cibber has: "It has been conjectured that the actors
of the Mysteries of Religion were _mummers_, a word signifying one who
makes and disguises himself to play the fool _without speaking_. They
were dressed in an antic manner, _dancing, mimicking_, and _showing
postures_." Mr. Wright also observes (in his work on the Mystery Plays
of Chester, published by the Shakespearean Society) that the "_chief
effect seems to have been caused by the dumb show_."

Before dealing with the Mysteries, and as perhaps a kind of retrospect,
let us have a look what Wharton has to say of the early drama. "Trade,"
he says (in the early centuries) "was carried on by means of fairs, which
lasted several days. Charlemagne established many great marts of this
sort in France, as did William the Conqueror and his Norman successors
in England. The merchants, who frequented these fairs in numerous
caravans and companies, employed every art to draw the people together.
They were, therefore, accompanied by jugglers, minstrels, and buffoons
(_i.e._, Pantomimists), who were no less interested in giving their
attendance and exercising their skill on these occasions. Few large
towns existed, no public spectacles or popular amusements were
established; and as the sedentary pleasures of domestic life and private
society were yet unknown, the fair time was the season for diversion. In
proportion as the shows were attended and encouraged, they began to be
set off with new decorations and improvements; and the arts of
buffoonery being rendered still more attractive by extending their
circle of exhibition, acquired an importance in the eyes of the people.
By degrees the Clergy, observing that the entertainments of dancing,
music, and mimicry exhibited at these annual celebrations made the
people less religious by promoting idleness and a love of festivity,
proscribed these sports and excommunicated the performers."

Mystery plays were afterwards divided into three classes, though the
generic term Mysteries, meaning all three, is generally used. In the
Mysteries, Biblical events were principally used; Miracle plays were
obtained from the legends of the saints; and the last, Moralities,
allegorical stories of a moral character not essentially taken from the
Bible, or from the legends of the saints, comprised the third heading.
The Mysteries were for several centuries known on the Continent before
they were performed in England. The earliest Mystery play known to have
been acted in England was at Dunstable about the year 1110. It was
probably in Latin, and composed by a Norman monk.

It is a peculiarity of the English Mystery plays that they were combined
into a series of plays on the Old and New Testament; and in which the
whole course of Divine Providence, from the Creation to the Day of
Judgment, is set before the spectator. Four noted groups of plays were
the Chester, the Towneley, Coventry, and York Mystery plays. The Chester
plays began on Whit Monday, and, continued till the following Wednesday.
Permission to perform them, in the beginning of their institution, had
twice to be asked of the Pope. They consisted of 24 plays, and were
almost annually performed till 1577. Before the suppression of the
monasteries the Grey Friars at Coventry were celebrated for their
exhibitions of the Mystery plays usually on _Corpus Christi_. The
Towneley, or Woodkirk group of plays were acted at Woodkirk, about four
miles from Wakefield, and they are of a style that may be likened to the
times of Henry VI., or Edward IV. Until the Mystery play fell into
disuse, the trading companies and guilds seem principally to have
maintained them. The mixture of secular with ecclesiastical players
helped to change the characters of the English plays and to provoke
censure, which began to be levelled at them from the beginning of the
thirteenth century.

The practise of performing plays in sacred edifices in England, had not
ceased in 1542, when Bishop Bonner prohibited them in his diocese.
However, so late as 1572, it appears that Interludes were occasionally
performed in Churches.

Collier speaks of a kind of Mystery, or Miracle play, exhibited in the
last century, with the characters of Herod, Beelzebub, and others. In
1838 Sandy mentions of having seen the play of "St. George and the
Dragon," presented in the Northern and Western parts of the Kingdom, or
rather Queendom, as Victoria had just ascended the throne. I myself
remember quite well, within a couple of decades ago, what was probably
at the time a remnant of the old Mystery play presented in a rural part
of Lancashire by men in a fantastic garb, and termed by the country
folk, "Paste-eggers." They generally appeared about Good Friday and on
to Easter; and their performance consisted of a mixture of music (?),
songs, and sometimes not over choice language. This custom does not now
exist where I write of, but it may do--though I very much doubt--in some
rural parts. On the Continent, as at Oberammergau, Mystery plays are
still enacted.

The following account of the Chester Mysteries may be of interest, and
appears (says Warton) in the Harleian Catalogue. M.S. Harl. 2013, etc.
Exhibited at Chester in the year 1327 at the expense of the different
trading companies of that city. "The Fall of Lucifer," by the tanners;
"The Creation," by the drapers; "The Deluge," by the dyers; "Abraham,
Melchizedeck and Lot," by the barbers; "Moses, Balak and Balaam," by the
cappers; "The Salutation and the Nativity," by the wrights (carpenters);
"The Shepherds feeding the Flocks by Night," by the painters and
glaziers; "The Three Kings," by the vintners; "The oblation of the Three
Kings," by the mercers; "The Killing of the Holy Innocents," by the
goldsmiths; "The Purification," by the blacksmiths; "The Temptations,"
by the butchers; "The Blindmen and Lazarus," by the glovers; "Jesus and
the Lepers," by the cowesarys; "Christ's Passion," by the bowyers,
fletchers and ironmongers; "Descent into Hell," by the cooks and
inn-keepers; "Resurrection," by the skinners; "Ascension," by the
taylors; "The Election of St. Matthias," "Sending of the Holy Ghost,"
etc., by the fishmongers; "Anti-christ," by the clothiers; and "The Day
of Judgment," by the websters (weavers). The reader will perhaps smile
at some of these combinations. This is the substance and order of the
former part of the play. God enters, creating the world, he breathes
life into Adam, leads him into Paradise, and opens his side while
sleeping. Adam and Eve appear _naked_, and _not ashamed_; and the old
Serpent enters, lamenting his fall. He converses with Eve. She eats part
of the forbidden fruit, and gives part to Adam. They propose, according
to the stage directions, to make themselves, _subligacula a folis
quibus tegamus pudenda_, cover their nakedness with leaves and converse
with God. God's curse. The Serpent exits, hissing. They are driven from
Paradise by four angels, and the Cherubim with a flaming sword. Adam
appears digging the ground, and Eve spinning. Their children, Cain and
Abel, enter, the former kills his brother. Adam's lamentation. Cain is
banished, etc., etc.

Adam and Eve, in the "altogether," so to speak, were acted like this as
late as the sixteenth century. In a play called "The Travails of the
Three English Brothers," acted in 1607, there occurs this:--

"Many idle toyes, but the old play _that Adam and Eve acted in bare
action under the figge tree draws most of the gentlemen_."

An Account of the Proclamation of the Mystery plays, acted in "Ye Citye
on ye Dee," may prove of interest, and the copy of which I subjoin is
taken from the Harleian M.S. No. 2013.

"The proclamation for Whitsone playes made by Wm. Newell, Clarke of the
Pendice, 24 Hen. 8. Wm. Snead 2nd yere Maior."

"For as much as auld tyme, not only for the augmentation and increese of
the holy and catholick faith of our Saviour Jesu Christ, and to exort
the mindes of comon people to good devotion and holsome doctrine
thereof, but also for the comonwelth and prosperity of this citty, a
play and declaration of divers storyes of Bible beginning with the
Creation and fall of Lucifer, and ending with the generall Judgment of
the world, to be declared and played in Whitsonne weeke, was devised and
made by one Sir Henry Frances, sometyme moonck of this monastrey
disolved, who obtayning and gat of Clemant, then Bushop of Rome, a 1000
dayes of pardon, and of the Bushop of Chester at that tyme 40 dayes of
pardon, graunted from thensforth to every person resorting, in peaceable
manner with good devotion, to heare and see the sayd playes, from time
to time as oft as they shall be played within the said citty (and that
every person or persons disturbing the sayd playes in the maner wise to
be acused by the authority of the sayd pope Clemant's bulls, untill such
tyme as he or they be absolved thereof) which playes were devised to the
honor of God by John Arnway, then maior of this citty of Chester, his
brethren and whole cominalty thereof, to be brought forth, declared, and
played, at the cost and charges of the craftesman and occupations of the
sayd citty, which hitherto have from tyme to tyme used and performed the
same accordingly.

"Wherefore Mr. maior, in the King's name, stratly chargeth and
commandeth that every person and persons of what estate, degree, or
condition so ever he or they be resorting to the sayd playes, do use
themselves peaciblie, without making any assault, affray, or other
disturbance, whereby the same playes shall be disturbed, and that no
manner of person or persons, whiche so ever he or they be, do use or
wear any unlawfull weapons within the precinct of the sayd citty during
the tyme of the sayd playes (not only upon payn of cursing by authority
of the sayd Pope Clemant's bulls but also) upon payn of imprisonment of
their bodyes, and making fine to the King at Mr. maior's pleasure."

Archdeacon Rogers, who died in 1595, and saw the Whitsuntide plays
performed at Chester in the preceding year, gives the following account
of the mode of exhibition:--

"The time of the yeare they were played was on Monday, Tuesday, and
Wenseday in Whitson weake. The maner of these playes weare every company
had his pagiant, or parte, which pagiants weare a high scafolde with 2
rowmes, a higher and a lower, upon 4 wheeles. In the lower they
apparelled themselves, and in the higher rowme they played, being all
open on the tope, that all behoulders might heare and see them. The
places where they played them was in every streete. They begane first at
the abay gates, and when the first pagiante was played, it was wheeled
to the high crosse before the mayor, and soe to every streete; and soe
every streete had a pagiant playinge before them at one time, till all
the pagiantes for the daye appoynted weare played, and when one pagiant
was neere ended, word was broughte from streete to streete that soe they
mighte come in place thereof exceedinge orderlye, and all the streetes
have their pagiantes afore them all at one time playeinge togeather; to
se which playes was greate resorte, and also scafoldes and stages made
in the streetes in those places where they determined to playe their
pagiantes."

Strutt has the following description of the Mystery plays:--"In the
early dawn of literature, and when the sacred Mysteries were the only
theatrical performances, what is now called the stage did then consist
of three several platforms or stages, raised one above another; on the
uppermost sat the _Pater Caelestis_, surrounded with his angels; on the
second appeared the holy saints and glorified men; and the last and
lowest were occupied by mere men who had not passed through this life to
the regions of eternity. On one side of this lowest platform was the
resemblance of a dark pitchy cavern, from whence issued appearance of
fire and flames; and when it was necessary the audience were treated
with hideous yellings and noises, as imitations of the howlings and
cries of the wretched souls tormented by the relentless demons. From
this yawning cave the devils themselves constantly ascended, to delight
and instruct the spectators; to delight because they were usually the
greatest jesters and buffoons that then appeared; and to instruct for
that they treated the wretched mortals who were delivered to them with
the utmost cruelty, warning thereby all men carefully to avoid the
falling into the clutches of such hardened and relentless spirits."

It is interesting to note that Hell was imitated by a whale's open jaws,
behind which a fire was lighted, in such a way, however, so as not to
injure the "damned," who had to pass into its gaping mouth. The
performer who impersonated God had not only his face but also the hair
of his wig gilded. Christ was dressed in a long sheep's skin. The Devil,
or Vice (the _Exodiarii_ and _Emboliariae_ of the ancient _Mimis_), was
easily recognisable by his horns and his tail, whilst his beard was of a
bright red colour, to indicate the flames of the region in which he
dwelt. Judas also wore a wig of a fiery hue, and, after being hung, had
sometimes to do the "cock crowing," as some old accounts of the York
Mysteries show.

It appears to have been customary for the Devil to appear before the
audience with a cry of "Ho! ho! ho!" somewhat similar to the
ejaculations of the Pantomime Clown in after years. (See _Gammer
Gurton's Needle_, Act II., Sc. 3, and "The Devil is an Ass," by Ben
Jonson, Act I., Sc. 1.) The following passage occurs in "Wily Beguiled,"
1606. "Tush! feare not the dodge; I'll rather put on my flashing red
nose, and my flaming face, and come wrapped in a calfe's skin, and cry
'Ho! ho! ho!'" Again, "I'll put me on my great carnation nose, and wrap
me in a rousing calf's-skin suit, and come like some hob-goblin, or some
Devil ascended from the grisly pit of hell, and like a scarebabe make
him take to his legs; I'll play the Devil, I warrant ye."




CHAPTER IX.

The Clown or Fool of the early English Drama--Moralities--The
Interlude--The rise of English Tragedy and Comedy--"Dumb Shews" in the
Old Plays--Plays suppressed by Elizabeth--A retrospect.


In the sixth chapter of this work, in quoting Malone, I have mentioned
that the _Exodiarii_ and _Emboliariae_ of the _Mimis_ were the remote
progenitors of the Clown of the Mystery Plays of this country. Now let
us see what were the duties the Clown fulfilled in the old plays of this
country, and also briefly of the others who were known under the generic
name of Clown or fool.

In the early drama the Clown was a personage of no mean importance and
whose duty was to preserve the stage from vacancy by amusing the
audience with extemporary buffoonery, and also at the end of the
performance. And, as Heywood, in his "History of Women" (1624), says "By
his mimic gestures to breed in the less capable mirth and laughter." On
these occasions, it was usual to descant, in a humourous style, on
various subjects proposed to him by the spectators; but they were more
commonly entertained with what was termed a jig: this was a ludicrous
composition in rhyme, sung by the Clown, accompanied by his pipe and
tabor. In these jigs there were sometimes more actors than one, and the
most unbounded license of tongue was allowed; the pith of the matter
being usually some scurrilous exposure of persons among, or well known
to the audience. Here again history repeats itself in this once more,
and in imitation of the satirical interludes of the Grecian stage and
the _Atellans_ and _Mimis_ of the Roman theatres.

The practice of putting the fools and Clowns in requisition between the
acts and scenes (observes Francis Douce), and after the play was
finished, to amuse the spectators with their tricks, may be traced to
the Greek and Roman theatres; and their usages being preserved in the
middle ages, wherever the Roman influence had spread, it would not, of
course, be peculiar to England. The records of the French theatre
demonstrate this fact; in the "Mystery of Saint Barbara," we find this
stage direction:--_Pausa. Vadunt, et stultus loquitur._ (A pause. They
quit the stage, and the fool speaks). And in this way he is frequently
brought on between the scenes.

It is quite obvious that the terms Clown and fool were used, though
improperly, perhaps, as synonymous by our old dramatists. Their confused
introduction might render this doubtful to one who had not well
considered the matter. The fool of our early plays denoted a mere idiot
or natural, or else a witty hireling retained to make sport for his
masters. The Clown was a character of more variety; sometimes he was a
mere rustic; and, often, no more than a shrewd domestic. There are
instances in which any low character in a play served to amuse with his
coarse sallies, and thus became the Clown of the piece. In fact, the
fool of the drama was a kind of heterogeneous being, copied in part from
real life, but highly coloured in order to produce effect. This opinion
derives force from what is put into the mouth of Hamlet, when he
admonishes those who perform the Clowns, to speak no more than is set
down for them. Indeed, Shakespeare himself cannot be absolved from the
imputation of making mere caricatures of his merry Andrews, unless we
suppose, what is very probable, that his compositions have been much
interpolated with the extemporaneous jokes of the players. To this
folly, allusions are made in a clever satire, entitled, "Pasquils
Mad-cappe, throwne at the Corruptions of these Times," 1626, quarto.

      "Tell country players, that old paltry jests
        Pronounced in a painted motley coate,
      Filles all the world so full of cuckoo nests,
        That nightingales can scarcely sing a note.
    Oh! bid them turn their minds to better meanings;
    Fields are ill sowne that give no better gleanings."

Sir Philip Sidney reprobates the custom of introducing fools on the
stage; and declares that the plays of his time were neither right
tragedies nor right comedies, for the authors mingled kings and Clowns,
"not," says he, "because the matter so carrieth it, but thrust in the
Clowne by head and shoulders to play a part in majestical matters, with
neither decencie nor discretion; so as neither the admiration and
commisseration, nor the right sportfulnesse, is by their mongrell
tragie-comedie obtained." Rankin, a puritan, contemporary with
Shakespeare, wrote a most bitter attack on plays and players, whom he
calls monsters; "And whie monsters?" says he, "because under colour of
humanitie they present nothing but prodigious vanitie; these are wels
without water, dead branches fit for fuell, cockle amongst corne,
unwholesome weedes amongst sweete hearbes; and, finallie, feends that
are crept into the worlde by stealth, and hold possession by subtill
invasion." In another place, he says, "some transformed themselves to
rogues, others to ruffians, some others to Clownes, a fourth to fools;
the rogues were ready, the ruffians were rude, theyr Clownes cladde as
well with country condition, as in ruffe russet; theyr fooles as fond as
might be."

To give a clear view of our subject, something of the different sorts of
fools may be thus classed:

1.--The _general domestic fool_, termed often, but _improperly_, a
_Clown_; described by Puttenham as "a buffoune, or counterfett foole."

2.--The _Clown_, who was a mere country booby, or a witty rustic.

3.--The _female fool_, who was generally an idiot.

4.--The _city or corporation fool_, an assistant in public
entertainments.

5.--The _tavern fool_, retained to amuse the customers.

6.--The _fool of the ancient Mysteries and Moralities_, otherwise the
_Vice_.

7.--The _fool in the old dumb shows_, often alluded to by Shakespeare.

8.--The _fool in the Whitsun ales and morris dance_.

9.--The _mountebank's fool, or merry Andrew_.

There may be others in our ancient dramas, of an irregular kind, not
reducible to any of these classes; but to exemplify them is not within
the scope of this essay: what has been stated may assist the readers of
old plays to judge for themselves when they meet with such characters.

The practice of retaining fools can be distinctly traced from the
remotest times. They were to be found alike in the palace and the
brothel; the Pope had his fool, and the bawd hers; they excited the
mirth of kings and beggars; the hovel of the villain and the castle of
the baron were alike exhilarated by their jokes. With respect to the
antiquity of this custom in England, it appears to have existed even
during the period of our Saxon history, but we are certain of the fact
in the reign of William the Conqueror. Maitre Wace, an historian of that
time, has an account of the preservation of William's life, when Duke of
Normandy, by his fool, _Goles_; and, in Domesday book, mention is made
of _Berdin joculator regis_; and though this term sometimes denoted a
minstrel, evidence might be adduced to prove, that in this instance it
signified a buffoon.

The entertainment, fools were expected to afford, may be collected in
great variety from our old plays, especially from those of Shakespeare;
but, perhaps, a good idea may be formed of their general conduct from a
passage in a curious tract by Lodge, entitled, "Wit's Miserie," 1599,
quarto: "Immoderate and disordinate joy became incorporate in the bodie
of a jeaster; this fellow in person is comely, in apparell courtly, but
in behaviour a very ape, and no man; his studie is to coin bitter
jeasts, or to shew antique motions, or to sing baudie sonnets and
ballads; give him a little wine in his head, he is continually flearing
and making of mouthes; he laughs intemperately at every little occasion,
and dances about the house, leaps over tables, outskips men's heads,
trips up his companions' heeles, burns sack with a candle, and hath all
the feats of a lord of misrule in the countrie: feed him in his humour,
you shall have his heart; in mere kindness he will hug you in his armes,
kisse you on the cheeke, and rapping out an horrible oath, crie 'God's
soule, Tum, I love you, you knowe my poore heart, come to my chamber for
a pipe of tobacco, there lives not a man in this world that I more
honor.' In these ceremonies you shall know his courting, and it is a
speciall mark of him at table, he sits and makes faces: keep not this
fellow company, for in jingling with him, your wardropes shall be
wasted, your credits crackt, your crownes consumed, and time (the most
precious riches of the world) utterly lost."

With regard to the fool's business on the stage, it was nearly the same
as in reality, with this difference, that the wit was more highly
seasoned. In Middleton's "Mayor of Quinborough," a company of actors,
with a Clown, make their appearance, and the following dialogue
ensues:--

1st Cheater. This is our Clown, sir.

Simon.       Fye, fye, your company
             Must fall upon him and beat him; he's too fair i'faith,
             To make the people laugh.

1st Cheater. Not as he may be dress'd, sir.

Simon.       Faith, dress him how you will. I'll give him
             That gift, he will never look half scurvily enough.
             Oh! the Clowns that I have seen in my time,
             The very peeping out of one of them would have
             Made a young heir laugh, though his father lay a-dying;
             A man undone in law the day before,
             (The saddest case that can be) might for his second
             Have burst himself with laughing, and ended all
             His miseries. Here was a merry world, my masters!
             Some talk of things of state, of puling stuff;
             There's nothing in a play like to a Clown,
             If he have the grace to hit on it, that's the thing indeed.
             Away then, shift; Clown, to thy motley crupper.

In the _praeludium_ to Goffe's "Careless Shepherdess," 1656, quarto,
there is a panegyric on them, and some concern is shown for the fool's
absence in the play itself, while it is stated that "The motley coat was
banished with trunk-hose." Yet in Charles II.'s reign, some efforts were
made to restore the character. In the tragedy of "Thorney Abbey, or the
London Maid," 1662, 12mo., the prologue is delivered by a fool, who uses
these words:--"The poet's a fool who made the tragedy, to tell a story
of a king and a court, and leave a fool out on't, when in Pacey's, and
Sommer's, and Patche's, and Archer's times, my venerable predecessours,
a fool was alwaies the principal verb." Shadwell's play of "The Woman
Captain," 1680, is perhaps the last in which a regular fool is
introduced; and even there, his master is made to say that the character
was exploded on the stage. In real life, as was formerly stated, the
professed fool was to be met with at a much later period, but the custom
has long been obsolete.

What I have said of the Mysteries of Religion plays will, I hope, be
sufficient to show the reader how they were associated with Pantomime.
The Moralities, founded on the Mysteries, were the means used to
inculcate, by the aid of a slight plot, religious truths without
directly using scriptural or legendary subjects. Malone says of
them:--"I am unable to ascertain when the first Morality appeared, but
incline to think not sooner than the reign of Edward IV. (about 1460).
The public pageants of the reign of his predecessor were uncommonly
splendid, and being then _first_ enlivened by the introduction of
_speaking_ allegorical personages, properly and characteristically
habited, naturally led the way to these personifications, by which
Moralities were _distinguished from_ the simple religious dramas called
Mysteries."

The Interlude, that was the progenitor of English Comedy, next arrived.
The origin of the Interlude is credited to John Heywood.

It is interesting to note that a play, entitled, "Gammer Gurton's
Needle," is credited with being our first English Comedy, though its
humour and wit, it is stated, is of a low and sordid kind. Others make
claim for the comedy, "Ralph Roister Doister."

Tragedy and Comedy now began to raise their heads, yet they could not,
for some time, do more than bluster and quibble. There is an excellent
criticism on them by that distinguished statesman, poet, scholar, and
brave soldier, Sir Philip Sydney. "Some of their pieces were only '_dumb
shews_,' some with choruses, and some they explained by an
Interlocutor," says an old writer on the subject. The mention of
Pantomime in connection with tragedy, and as an example how Pantomime
was requisitioned in Shakespeare's time, is shown in the Second Scene of
Act III. of "Hamlet," wherein the "dumb shew" is given by the players.

The true drama, however, received birth and perfection from the creative
geniuses of Shakespeare, Beaumont and Fletcher, Jonson, and others.
Though the stage no sooner began to talk than it grew scurrilous, and
plays were thought "Dangerous to Religion, the State, Honesty, and
Manners, and also for Infection, in Time of Sickness." Wherefore they
were afterwards for some time suppressed. But upon application to the
Queen and Council they were again tolerated under the following
restrictions: "That no Plays be acted on Sundays at all, nor on any
other Holidays till after Evening Prayer. That no playing be in the
_Dark_, nor continue and such Time, but the Auditors may return to their
Dwellings in London before Sunset, or at least before it be _Dark_." The
foregoing is from Stow, and this Act was made in the reign of Elizabeth.
The Virgin Queen does not seem to have cared much about this enactment,
as we find that on Sunday, the 24th September, 1592, she and her Court
attended a play at Oxford.

As Tragedy and Comedy progressed on the English stage, Pantomime, as far
as it was associated with the dumb shows in the early English drama,
became, little by little, a thing of the past.

We have seen, and traced, from the Creation of this planet, and through
succeeding ages, how Pantomime has always flourished; we have seen also
how the Interlude gave way to the Comedy; we will now see how this love
of light entertainment formulated in this country by the Interlude, and,
about the same time, by the Italian Masque Comedy, the progenitor of
Pantomime (referring to the whole as a spectacle), and the forerunner in
France, also of that other form of light entertainment known as the
French Vaudeville, cultivated by Le Sage and other French writers of
note.

To go to the bed-rock for our facts, and for the innovation of all this,
it is necessary in thought, and perhaps as well in spirit, to journey to
Italy.




CHAPTER X.

The Italian Masque--The Masque in England--First appearance in this
country of Harlequin--Joe Haines as Harlequin--Marlowe's "Faustus"--A
Curious Play--The Italian Harlequin--Colley Cibber,
Penkethman--Shakespeare's Burlesques of the Masque--Decline of the
Masque.


In Italy the Masque entertainment long held sway, and was a light form
of amusement, consisting of Pantomime, music, singing, and dancing, and
an adaptation of the _Fabulae Atellanae_ of ancient Italy. The
performers wore masks, also high-heeled shoes, fitted with brass or iron
heels, which jingled as they danced. This ancient custom to present-day
stage dancers will doubtless be of interest. Masks, like on the stages
of the Greeks and the Romans, were used, hence the title Mask, or
Masque, as it is sometimes written both ways. In the days of Elizabeth
the custom was also practised in the Elizabethean Masque. The Masquerade
and the Masked ball, or _Bal-Masque_, are survivals of this ancient
custom.

Crossing the Alps, if the reader will accompany me, the Italian Masque
Comedy we find was already known in France in the fifteenth century. In
the days of Mary de Medici ballets were introduced, and by the time of
Louis XIV. "Opera" (_i.e._, the Masque) was in full swing in the early
part of this reign. On the Spanish stage ballets, with allegorical
characters, were known in the sixteenth century; and, in fact,
throughout Europe about this age, and some time previously this
improvised form of Italian Comedy, and the several characters in it,
belonging to the family of Harlequin, had long been familiar subjects.

Returning to England after our little holiday, the Masque in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries had become very popular. The
architect, Inigo Jones, being frequently employed to furnish the
decorations with all the magnificence of his invention. At the Courts of
Elizabeth, James I., Charles I., and up to the time when all plays were
totally suppressed, was it the rage. At the Restoration the Masque was
revived again, and here, borrowing the name from the continent, it is
called "Opera." In proof of this, in Dryden's work, "Albion and
Albanius," 1685, "Opera" is defined as a "poetical tale or picture
represented by vocal and instrumental music, and endowed with machines
and dances."

The dramatic poet and author, Ben Jonson, collaborated with Inigo Jones,
the architect, in devising these Masque plays, Jonson supplying the
words, and Jones the scenic effects, the latter being very gorgeous,
consisting of "landscapes, mountains, and clouds, which opened to
display heathen deities illuminated by variegated coloured lights." Over
these Masques or "Operatic" entertainments Jonson and Jones quarrelled,
as the former's grievance was that he received no more for his
librettos than Jones did for his scenic devices. Ben Jonson thereupon
wrote satires upon Inigo Jones, and in one of his squibs appears the
satirical line, "Painting and Carpentry are the Soul of Masque." Is not
this applicable to many of our present-day Pantomimes, which, as I have
just stated in the previous chapter, the Masque was one of the original
progenitors?

Inigo Jones and Jonson first collaborated in the "Masque of Blackness,"
performed at Whitehall on Twelfth Night, 1603. In our money this Masque
cost some L10,000. Jones and Jonson's quarrel originated because the
poet had, in the "Masque of Chloridia," performed in 1630, prefixed his
own name before that of Jones. In consequence of this "rare old Ben" was
deprived--through Jones' influence--of employment at Court.

Gifford, in his "Memoirs of Ben Jonson," says that "In poetry, painting,
architecture, they (the Masques) have not since been equalled."

"The Masque," continues Gifford, "as it attained its highest degree of
excellence, admitted of dialogue, singing and dancing; these were not
independent of one another, but combined by the introduction of some
ingenious fable into an harmonious whole. When the plan was formed, the
aid of the sister-arts was called in; for the essence of the Masque was
pomp and glory. Movable scenery of the most costly and splendid kind was
lavished on the Masque; the most celebrated masters were employed on
the songs and dances; and all that the kingdom afforded of vocal and
instrumental excellence was employed to embellish the exhibition. Thus,
magnificently constructed, was composed, as Lord Bacon says, for
princes, and by princes it was played. Of these Masques, the skill with
which their ornaments were designed, and the inexpressible grace with
which they were executed appear to have left a vivid impression on the
mind of Jonson. His genius awakens at once, and all his faculties attune
to sprightliness and pleasure. He makes his appearance like his own
Delight, accompanied with Grace, Love, Harmony, Revel, Sport, and
Laughter."

In the Masques the Pantomimic dances of the Masquers were known as
motions:--

    "In curious knot and mazes so
    The Spring at first was taught to go;
    And Zephyr, when he came to woo
    His Flora had his _motions_ too;
    And thus did Venus learn to lead
    The Idalian brawls, and so to tread,
    As if the wind, not she did walk,
    Nor press'd a flower, nor bow'd a stalk."

Before the arrival of the Italian Masque in England, the Harlequin
family were unknown, and, doubtless, Harlequin's first appearance in
this country was in consonance with the Masque itself.

Heywood, in a tract, published in 1609, entitled, "_Troia Britannica_,"
mentions "Zanyes, Pantaloons, Harlakeans, in which the French, but
especially the Italians, have been excellent as known in this country."

The earliest record I can find of a Harlequin performing in this country
is in the Masque given before Charles I. and his Court on the Sunday
evening following Twelfth Night, 1637. An account of this Masque, as
well as other information dealing with the Masque entertainments, will
be found in my volume, "Stage Whispers," and in the article on
theatrical scenery.

In a comedy, written by Ravenscroft, after the Italian manner, Joe
Haines, in 1667, donned the motley jacket of Harlequin, and which, in
all probability, was the first appearance of Harlequin on the English
boards, though not in England, as stated above. In a farce of the
audacious Mrs. Aphra Behn's, produced twenty years afterwards, Harlequin
and Scaramouch were two of the characters. Mrs. Behn died April 16,
1689, and was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. To Marlowe's
"Faustus," Mountfort added comic scenes to the tragedy, introducing
Harlequin and Scaramouch. A Harlequin, Pantaloon, Columbine, and Clown
appeared in a curious piece in 1697, entitled, "Novelty; or Every Act a
Play." The first act consisted of a pastoral Drama, the second of a
Comedy, the third a Masque, the fourth a Tragedy, and the fifth act a
Farce.

In Italy the fame of Harlequin was at its zenith at the close of the
seventeenth century. In this country in 1687 a Harlequin (Penkethman)
appeared in a farce called "The Emperor of the Moon" without a mask.
Colley Cibber says of this performance "That when he (Penkethman) first
played Harlequin in 'The Emperor of the Moon' several gentlemen (who
inadvertently judged by the rules of nature) fancied that a great deal
of the drollery, and spirit of his grimace was lost by his wearing that
useless, unmeaning mask, therefore insisted that the next time of his
acting that part he should play without it. Their desire was accordingly
complied with, but alas! in vain--Penkethman was no more Harlequin. His
humour was quite disconcerted."

In "The Tempest," Shakespeare introduces a Masque, and also in his
"Midsummer Nights' Dream," the play of "Pyramus and Thisbe," performed
by the Clowns, is in burlesque of the Masque plays.

In both these two plays of the bard's, and in connection with the Masque
plays, we see, from the stage directions in them, how Pantomime formed
part of their effective representation.

In out heroding-herod in the way of splendour, showy dresses and
expensive machinery, the Masque soon fell into decay; and, as Ben Jonson
states, "The glory of all these solemnities had perished like a blaze,
and gone out in the beholder's eyes; so short-lived are the bodies of
all things in comparison with their souls."




CHAPTER XI.

Italian Pantomime--Riccoboni--Broom's "Antipodes"--Gherardi--Extemporal
Comedies--Salvator Rosa--Impromptu Acting.


Pantomime in Italy had two distinct features, one a species of
buffoonery, termed _Lazzi_, and the other Extemporal or Improvised
Comedies.

"_Lazzi_," mentions Riccoboni, in his "_Histoire du Theatre Italien_,"
is a term corrupted from the old Tuscan _Lacci_, which signifies a knot,
or something that connects. (Both the _Lazzi_ and the Extemporal
Comedies were all derived from the one original source, that of the
Satirical drama of the Greeks, and perpetuated in the _Fabulae
Atellanae_ or _Laudi Osci_ of Italy.)

Riccoboni continues: "These pleasantries, called _Lazzi_, are certain
actions by which the performer breaks into the scene, to paint to the
eye his emotions of panic or jocularity; but as such gestures are
foreign to the business going on, the nicety of the art consists in not
interrupting the scene, and connecting the _Lazzi_ with it; thus to tie
the whole together."

_Lazzi_ is what we might term "bye play," which, by gesture and action,
could not detract, but rather added to the effectiveness of the scene in
progress.

In Broom's "Antipodes," which was performed at the Salisbury Court
Theatre, London, in 1638, a _by-play_, as he calls it, is represented in
this comedy--"A word (explains Malone) for the application of which we
are indebted to this writer, there being no other term in our language
that I know of, which so properly expresses that species of Interlude
which we find in our poet's 'Hamlet,' and other pieces."

Riccoboni, in describing some _Lazzi_, says that Harlequin and Scapin
being in a famished condition, Scapin, in order to bring their young
mistress out, asks Harlequin to groan. Scapin explains to her the
reason, and while they are talking, Harlequin is performing his _Lazzi_.
This consists of eating an imaginary hatful of cherries, and throwing
the stones at Scapin; or catching imaginary flies, and chopping off
their wings.

"_Lazzi_," we are told, "although they seem to interrupt the progress of
the action, yet in cutting it they slide back into it, and connect or
tie the whole."

When Riccoboni and his company first appeared in France, though being
unable to speak nothing but Italian, their audiences, though not being
able to understand the _words_, yet the performers were such
past-masters in the Mimetic Art that their representations were just as
intelligible and as expressive as if they had been with words.

Gherardi, in his treatise, "_Theatre Italien_," speaks of a Scaramouch,
who, waiting for his master, Harlequin, seats and plays on the guitar.
Suddenly, by Pasquariel, he is thrown into a fright. "It was then," says
Gherardi, "that incomparable model of our most eminent actors displayed
the miracles of his art; that art which paints the passions in the face,
throws them into every gesture, and through a whole scene of frights
upon frights, conveys the most powerful expression of ludicrous terror.
This man moved all hearts by the simplicity of nature, more than skilful
orators can with all the charms of persuasive rhetoric."

The Extemporal Comedies were all improvised, the actors underwent no
rehearsal, and, as the name denotes, everything was impromptu. The
Scenario, or plot, had just simply the scenes and the characters set
forth, and it was then hung in a conspicuous place on the stage; and
just in a similar way as the gas or lime light "plots" are affixed in
present day theatres, though the Scenarios were not as elaborate as what
some of our gas or limelight "plots" are.

Before going on the stage, the Mimes just inspected the Scenario of the
_Comedia Del' Arte_, and for the dialogue and action everything depended
solely upon their Pantomimic genius.

Disraeli mentions that men of great genius had a passion for performing
in these Extemporal Comedies, and, amongst others, the great painter,
Salvator Rosa. A favourite character of Rosa's was that of Formica, a
Clown of Calabria. Passeri, in his life of Rosa, tells the following
anecdote:--

One summer, Salvator Rosa joined a company of young persons, who were
curiously addicted to the making of _Comedie all' Improviso_. In the
midst of a vineyard they raised a rustic stage, under the direction of
one Mussi, who enjoyed some literary reputation, particularly for his
sermons preached in Lent.

Their second Comedy was numerously attended, and I went among the rest.
I sat on the same bench by good fortune with Cavalier Bernini,
Romanelli, and Guido, all well-known persons. Salvator Rosa, who had
already made himself a favourite with the Roman people, under the
character of Formica, opened with a prologue in company with other
actors. He proposed for relieving themselves of the extreme heats and
_ennui_ that they should make a Comedy, and all agreed. Formica (Rosa)
then spoke (in the satirical Venetian dialect) these exact words, which
Mr. Disraeli translates as follows:--"I will not, however, that we
should make a Comedy like certain persons who cut clothes, and put them
on this man's back, and on that man's back; for at last the time comes
which shows how much faster went the cut of the shears than the pen of
the poet; nor will we have entering on the scene, couriers, brandy
sellers, and goatherds, and there stare shy and blockish, which I think
worthy the senseless invention of an ass."

Passeri continues: "At this time Bernini had made a Comedy in the
Carnival very pungent and biting; and that summer he had one of
Castelli's performed in the suburbs, where, to represent the dawn of
day, appeared on the stage water-carriers, couriers, and goat-herds,
going about--all which is contrary to rule, which allows of no character
who is not concerned in the dialogue to mix with the groups. At these
words of the Formica, I, who well knew his meaning, instantly glanced my
eye at Bernini, to observe his movements; but he, with an artificial
carelessness, showed that this 'cut of the shears' did not touch him;
and he made no apparent show of being hurt. But Castelli, who was also
near, tossing his head and smiling in bitterness, showed clearly that he
was hit."

In concluding, Mr. Disraeli observes that: "This Italian story, told
with all the poignant relish of these vivacious natives, to whom such a
stinging incident was an important event, also shows the personal
freedoms taken on these occasions by a man of genius, entirely in the
spirit of the ancient Roman _Atellanae_ or the Grecian _Satyra_."

Of Extemporal Comedies, Riccoboni mentions that: "This kind of spectacle
is peculiar to Italy; one cannot deny that it has graces perfectly its
own, and which _written Comedy can never exhibit_. This impromptu mode
of acting furnishes opportunities for a perpetual change in the
performance, so that the same Scenario repeated still appears a new one:
thus one Comedy may become twenty Comedies. _An actor of this
description, always supposing an actor of genius, is more vividly
affected than one who has coldly got his part by rote. But figure,
memory, voice, and even sensibility, are not sufficient for the actor
all' improvista; he must be in the habit of cultivating the imagination,
pouring forth the flow of expression, and prompt in those flashes which
instantly vibrate in the plaudits of an audience._"

Again, Gherardi: "Anyone may learn a part by rote, and do something bad,
or indifferent, on another theatre. With us the affair is quite
otherwise; and when an Italian actor dies, it is with infinite
difficulty that we can supply his place. An Italian actor learns nothing
by head; he looks on the subject for a moment before he comes forward on
the stage, and entirely depends upon his imagination for the rest. The
actor who is accustomed merely to recite what he has been taught is so
completely occupied by his memory, that he appears to stand, as it were,
unconnected either with the audience or his companions; he is so
impatient to deliver himself of the burthen he is carrying that he
trembles like a schoolboy, or is as senseless as an echo, _and could
never speak if others had not spoken before_. Such a tutored actor among
us would be like a paralytic arm to a body: an unserviceable member,
only fatiguing the healthy action of the sound parts."




CHAPTER XII.

Pantomimical Characters--Neapolitan Pantomime--The Harlequin Family--The
Original Characters in the Italian Pantomimes--Celebrated
Harlequins--Italian and French Harlequins--A French view of the English
Clown--Pierrots' origin--Pantaloon, how the name has been
derived--Columbine--Marionette and Puppet Shows.


After having shown what the _Lazzi_ and Extemporal Comedies were like,
let us now turn to the Pantomimical characters associated with their
representations.

Every one, observes Mr. Isaac Disraeli, of this grotesque family were
the creatures of national genius, chosen by the people for themselves.
Italy, both ancient and modern, exhibits a gesticulating people of
comedians, and the same comic genius characterised the nation through
all its revolutions, as well as the individual through all his fortunes.
The lower classes still betray their aptitude in that vivid humour,
where the action is suited to the word--silent gestures sometimes
expressing whole sentences. They can tell a story, and even raise the
passions, without opening their lips. No nation in modern Europe
possesses so keen a relish for the burlesque, insomuch as to show a
class of unrivalled poems, which are distinguished by the very title;
and perhaps there never was an Italian in a foreign country, however
deep in trouble, but would drop all remembrance of his sorrows, should
one of his countrymen present himself with the paraphernalia of Punch at
the corner of a street. I was acquainted with an Italian, a philosopher
and a man of fortune, residing in this country, who found so lively a
pleasure in performing Punchinello's little comedy, that, for this
purpose, with considerable expense and curiosity, he had his wooden
company, in all their costume, sent over from his native place. The
shrill squeak of the tin whistle had the same comic effect on him as the
notes of the _Ranz des Vaches_ have in awakening the tenderness of
domestic emotions in the wandering Swiss--the national genius is
dramatic. Lady Wortley Montagu when she resided at a villa near Brescia,
was applied to by the villagers for leave to erect a theatre in her
saloon: they had been accustomed to turn the stables into a playhouse
every Carnival. She complied, and, as she tells us, was "Surprised at
the beauty of their scenes, though painted by a country painter. The
performance was yet more surprising, the actors being all peasants; but
the Italians have so natural a genius for comedy, they acted as well as
if they had been brought up to nothing else, particularly the Arlechino,
who far surpassed any of our English, though only the tailor of our
village, and I am assured never saw a play in any other place." Italy is
the mother, and the nurse, of the whole Harlequin race.

Hence it is that no scholars in Europe but the most learned Italians,
smit by the national genius, could have devoted their vigils to narrate
the evolutions of Pantomime, to compile the annals of Harlequin, to
unroll the genealogy of Punch, and to discover even the most secret
anecdotes of the obscurer branches of that grotesque family, amidst
their changeful fortunes, during a period of two thousand years. Nor is
this all; princes have ranked them among the Rosciuses; and Harlequins
and Scaramouches have been ennobled. Even Harlequins themselves have
written elaborate treatises on the almost insurmountable difficulties of
their art. I despair to convey the sympathy they have inspired me with
to my reader; but every _Tramontane_ genius must be informed, that of
what he has never seen, he must rest content to be told.

Of the ancient Italian troop we have retained three or four of the
characters, while their origin has nearly escaped our recollection; but
of the burlesque comedy, the extempore dialogue, the humorous fable, and
its peculiar species of comic acting, all has vanished.

Many of the popular pastimes of the Romans unquestionably survived their
dominion, for the people will amuse themselves, though their masters may
be conquered; and tradition has never proved more faithful than in
preserving popular sports. Many of the games of our children were played
by Roman boys; the mountebanks, with the dancers and tumblers on their
moveable stages, still in our fairs, are Roman; the disorders of the
_Bacchanalia_, Italy appears to imitate in her Carnivals. Among these
Roman diversions certain comic characters have been transmitted to us,
along with some of their characteristics, and their dresses. The
speaking Pantomimes and Extemporal Comedies which have delighted the
Italians for many centuries, are from this ancient source.

Rich, in his "Companion to the Latin Dictionary," has an excellent
illustration of this passage:--"This Art was of very great antiquity,
and much practiced by the Greeks and Romans, both on the stage and in
the tribune, induced by their habit of addressing large assemblies in
the open air, where it would have been impossible for the majority to
comprehend what was said without the assistance of some conventional
signs, which enabled the speaker to address himself to the eye, as well
as the ear of the audience. These were chiefly made by certain positions
of the hands and fingers, the meaning of which was universally
recognised and familiar to all classes, and the practice itself reduced
to a regular system, as it remains at the present time amongst the
populace of Naples, who will carry on a long conversation between
themselves by mere gesticulation, and without pronouncing a word." That
many of these signs are similar to those used by the Ancients, is proved
by the same author, who copies from an antique vase a scene which he
explains by the action of the hands of the figures, adding, "A common
lazzaroni, when shown one of these compositions, will at once explain
the purport of the action, which a scholar with all his learning cannot
divine." The gesture to signify love, employed by the Ancients and
modern Neapolitans, was joining the tips of the thumb and forefinger of
the left hand; an imputation or asseveration by holding forth the right
hand; a denial by raising the same hand, extending the fingers. In
mediaeval works of art, a particular attitude of the fingers is adopted
to exhibit malicious hate: it is done by crossing the forefinger of each
hand, and is generally seen in figures of Herod or Judas Iscariot.

Down to the fifteenth century there is not much known of the family of
Harlequin, with the exception, perhaps, that the name Zany became more
widely distributed into such as Drolls, Clowns, Pantaloons, Punches,
Scaramouches, and the like. In the Italian Comedy, of purely native
growth, the original characters were Pantaloon, a Venetian Merchant;
Dottore, a Bolognese physician; Spavento, a Neapolitan braggart;
Pulcinello, a wag of Apalia; Giangurgoto and Corviello, two Clowns of
Cala-simpleton; and Arlechino, a blundering servant of Bergamo.

The latter The Harlequin of the Italian theatre, has passed through,
mentions Mr. Disraeli, all the vicissitudes of fortune. At first (as we
have seen) he was a true representative of the ancient Mime; but, during
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, he degenerated into a booby and
a gourmand, the perpetual butt for a sharp-witted fellow, his companion,
Brighella, the knife and the whetstone. Harlequin, however, under the
reforming hand of Goldoni, became, in after years, a child of nature,
and the delight of his country; and he has commemorated the historical
character of the great Harlequin Sacchi. It may serve the reader to
correct his notions of one, from the absurd pretender with us who has
usurped the title. "Sacchi possessed a lively and brilliant imagination.
While other Harlequins merely repeated themselves, Sacchi, who always
adhered to the essence of the play, contrived to give an air of
freshness to the piece by his new sallies and unexpected repartees. His
comic traits and his jests were neither taken from the language of the
lower orders, nor that of the comedians. He levied contributions on
comic authors, on poets, orators, and philosophers; and in his
impromptus they often discovered the thoughts of Seneca, Cicero, or
Montaigne. He possessed the art of appropriating the remains of these
great men to himself, and allying them to the simplicity of the
blockhead; so that the same proposition which was admired in a serious
author, became highly ridiculous in the mouth of this excellent actor."
In France Harlequin was improved into a wit, and even converted into a
moralist; he is the graceful hero of Florian's charming compositions,
which please even in the closet. "This imaginary being, invented by the
Italians, and adopted by the French," says the ingenious Goldoni, "has
the exclusive right of uniting _naivete_ with _finesse_, and no one ever
surpassed Florian in the delineation of this amphibious character. He
has even contrived to impart sentiment, passion, and morality to his
pieces." Harlequin must be modelled as a national character, the
creature of manners; and thus the history of such a Harlequin might be
that of the age and of the people, whose genius he ought to represent.

The history of a people is often detected in their popular amusements;
one of these Italian Pantomimic characters shows this. They had a
_Capitan_, who probably originated in the _Miles gloriosus_ of Plautus;
a brother, at least, of our Ancient Pistol and Bobadil. The ludicrous
names of this military poltroon were Spavento (Horrid fright),
Spezza-fer (Shiver-spear), and a tremendous recreant was Captain
Spavento de Val inferno. When Charles V. entered Italy, a Spanish
Captain was introduced; a dreadful man he was too, if we are to be
frightened by names: Sangre e Fuego! and Matamoro! His business was to
deal in Spanish rhodomontades, to kick out the native Italian Capitan,
in compliment to the Spaniards, and then to take a quiet caning from
Harlequin, in compliment to themselves. When the Spaniards lost their
influence in Italy, the Spanish Captain was turned into Scaramouch, who
still wore the Spanish dress, and was perpetually in a panic. The
Italians could only avenge themselves on the Spaniards in Pantomime! On
the same principle the gown of Pantaloon over his red waistcoat and
breeches, commemorates a circumstance in Venetian history expressive of
the popular feeling.

The characters of the Italian Pantomime became so numerous, that every
dramatic subject was easily furnished with the necessary personages of
comedy. That loquacious pedant, the Dottore, was taken from the lawyers
and the physicians, babbling false Latin in the dialect of learned
Bologna. Scapin was a livery servant, who spoke the dialect of Bergamo,
a province proverbially abounding with rank intriguing knaves, who,
like the slaves in Plautus and Terence, were always on the watch to
further any wickedness; while Calabria furnished the booby Giangurgello
with his grotesque nose. Moliere, it has been ascertained, discovered in
the Italian theatre at Paris his "_Medecin malgre Lui_," his
"_Etourdi_," his "_L'Avare_," and his "_Scapin_." Milan offered a pimp
in Brighella; Florence, an ape of fashion in Gelsomino. These and other
Pantomimic characters, and some ludicrous ones, as the Tartaglia, a
spectacled dotard, a stammerer, and usually in a passion, had been
gradually introduced by the inventive powers of an actor of genius, to
call forth his own peculiar talents.

The Pantomimes, or, as they have been described, the continual
Masquerades, of Ruzzante, with all these diversified personages, talking
and acting, formed, in truth, a burlesque comedy. Some of the finest
geniuses of Italy became the votaries of Harlequin; and the Italian
Pantomime may be said to form a school of its own. The invention of
Ruzzante was one capable of perpetual novelty. Many of these actors have
been chronicled either for the invention of some comic character, or for
their true imitation of nature in performing some favourite one. One,
already immortalised by having lost his real name in that of Captain
Matamoros, by whose inimitable humours he became the most popular man in
Italy, invented the Neapolitan Pullicinello; while another, by deeper
study, added new graces to another burlesque rival. One Constantini
invented the character of Mezetin, as the Narcissus of Pantomime. He
acted without a mask, to charm by the beautiful play of his countenance,
and display the graces of his figure; the floating drapery of his
fanciful dress could be arranged by the changeable humour of the wearer.
Crowds followed him in the streets, and a King of Poland ennobled him.
The Wit and Harlequin Dominic sometimes dined at the table of Louis
XIV.--Tiberio Florillo, who invented the character of Scaramouch, had
been the amusing companion of the boyhood of Louis XIV.; and from him
Moliere learnt much, as appears by the verses under his portrait:--

    Cet illustre comedien
    De son art traca la carriere:
    II fut le maitre de Moliere,
    Et la Nature fut le sien.

The last lines of an epitaph on one of these Pantomimic actors may be
applied to many of them during their flourishing period:--

    Toute sa vie il a fait rire;
    Il a fait pleurer a sa mort.

Several of these admirable actors were literary men, who have written on
their art, and shown that it was one. The Harlequin Cecchini composed
the most ancient treatise on this subject, and was ennobled by the
Emperor Matthias; and Nicholas Barbieri, for his excellent acting called
the Beltrame, a Milanese simpleton, in his treatise on comedy, tells us
that he was honoured by the conversation of Louis XIII., and rewarded
with fortune.

A sketch of Harlequin's original part is worth recording. "He is a
mixture of wit, simplicity, ignorance, and grace, he is a half made up
man, a great child with gleams of reason and intelligence, and all his
mistakes and blunders have something arch about them. The true mode of
representing him is to give him suppleness, agility, the playfulness of
a kitten with a certain coarseness of exterior, which renders his
actions more absurd. His part is that of a faithful valet; greedy;
always in love; always in trouble, either on his own or his master's
account; afflicted and consoled as easily as a child, and whose grief is
as amusing as his joy."

His costume consisted of a jacket fastened in front with loose ribbons,
and pantaloons of wide dimensions, patched with various coloured pieces
of cloth sewn on in any fashion. His beard was worn straight, and of a
black colour; on his face he had a half black mask and in his belt of
untanned leather he carried a wooden sword.

In Italy there were many varieties of Harlequin, the most notable being
Trivelin, and Truffaldin. The dress of the former, instead of the
patches symmetrically arranged, had triangular patches along the seams,
and suns and moons only for patches. He wore the soft hat and hare's
foot, but did not carry the wooden sword. The hare's foot denoting
speed, has in all probability its origin in the winged cap of the god
Mercury.

Truffaldin is a species of Harlequin, who first appeared about 1530. He
represented (_truffa_, the villain) a sneaking kind of knave, and in the
middle of the seventeenth century this character was very popular.

In France, about 1660, Cardinal Mazarin invited one Joseph Dominique
Biancolelli, to come to Paris to give entertainments. Shortly after his
arrival Biancolelli gave quite a new reading to the character of
Arlechino, as he made him not only a wit and punster, but also a bit of
a philosopher. Biancolelli's improvements did not end here, as he turned
his attention to the dress of Arlechino, which was now made of finer and
better quality, whilst the parti-coloured patches were made more
artistic and attractive. On the death of Lolatelli, who, in his
lifetime, had played a kind of Arlechino part, Biancolelli succeeded
him, and soon sprang into prominence, and acquired a great artistic
reputation. Whilst dancing before Louis XV. Biancolelli contracted a
cold, which set up inflammation of the lungs, causing his death. His
companions, at the theatre in which he performed, to mark the sense of
their great grief, closed the theatre for a month. Biancolelli died in
1688.

As Arlechino, Biancolelli was succeeded by his son, Pierre, who played
under the name of Dominique.

A Tuscan, named Gherardi, who had obtained celebrity as a singer, was
the next successful French Harlequin. In consequence of a fall Gherardi
met his death, in the year 1700.

Nearly a couple of decades afterwards, in 1716, Thomassin made his
appearance as Harlequin, in pieces written for him by Marivaux, such as
"_Le Prince Travesti_," "_La Surprise de l'Amour_," and in which he
appeared with great success. So daring were Thomassin's tricks, and in
such popularity was he held, that, fearful of losing their favourite
like Gherardi, he was obliged to discontinue them.

Another competitor now arose to take the crown from Thomassin, and in
the person of one Carlo Bertinazzi, commonly called Carlin. Our actor,
Garrick, was an admirer of this famous Mime. Of Carlin, M. Sand
speaks:--"Like most clever buffoons, he had a very melancholy
disposition, and, as with Dominique, his gaiety was what the English
term humour. It belonged to his mind, and not to his temperament."
Carlin also wrote a book entitled, "_Les Metamorphosis d'Arlequin_." In
1783 Carlin died, and his place in the favour of the public was filled
by Galinetti.

The French view of the English Clown is interesting: "The English clown
(whose nearest representative on the French stage is Pierrot) is an odd
and fantastical being. The Florentine Stentorella alone resembles him in
his jests and tricks. His strange dress seems to have been taken from
the American Indians. It consists of a white, red, yellow, and green net
work, ornamented with diamond-shaped pieces of stuff of various colours.
His face is floured, and streaked with paint a deep carmine; the
forehead is prolonged to the top of the head, which is covered with a
red wig, from the centre of which a little stiff tail points to the sky.
His manners are no less singular than his costume. He is not dumb, like
our Pierrot, but, on the contrary, he sustains an animated and witty
conversation; he is also an acrobat, and very expert in feats of
strength."

M. Blandelaire gives a more poetical description: "The English Pierrot
is not a person as pale as the moon, mysterious as silent, straight and
long, like the gallows to whom we have been accustomed in Deburean. The
English Pierrot enters like the tempest, and tumbles like a parcel; his
laugh resembles joyous thunder. He is short and fat; his face is floured
and streaked with paint; he has a great patch of red on each cheek; his
mouth is enlarged by prolongation of the lips by means of two red bands,
so that when he laughs his mouth appears to open from ear to ear."

The Pierrots--not only in France, but on the Continent generally--took
all the characteristics of the Zanys, Bertoldo, Paggliaccio, Gros,
Giullaume, Pedrolino, Gilles, Corviello, and Peppe Nappa, of the Italian
Comedy, and all owing at least their original conception to the theatres
of the Greeks, and the Romans. On the Italian stage there was not a
principal Clown like in England, the foremost place being occupied by
Arlechino. The four principal masked characters of the Italian _Comedia
del' Arte_ in Venice consisted of Tartaglia (a stammerer), Truffildino,
Brighella (a representative of orators and public personages), and
Pantaloon (a native of Venice). The name of Pantaloon is derived from
_planta-leone_ (_plante-lion_--he planted the lion). The probable
meaning of it in this particular is that the Venetian merchants, it is
said, in boasting of their conquests set up their standard--the Venetian
standard being the lion of St. Mark--on various islands in the
Mediterranean, and from which they were nicknamed, it is said, "plant
lion." A more probable derivation of the word is that the ancient patron
saint of Venice is San Pantaleone. St. Pantaleone's day is July 27. He
was martyred A.D. 303. In "Childe Harold," Lord Byron, in Canto IV.,
stanza 14, has that "The Venetian name of Pantaleone is her very
by-word."

Pantaloon has been, at various times, husband, father, and widower.
Sometimes he is rich, then poor, and occasionally a spendthrift. The
dress that he wore consisted of tight red breeches, rather short, a long
black robe, red stockings and waistcoat, a little woollen skull-cap and
slippers.

When the Venetian republic lost Negropont mourning generally was
adopted, and Pantaloon adopted it with the rest, and on the Continent
mourning has, I believe, formed a component part of Pantaloon's dress
ever since.

In 1750 Darbes, in Italy, was one of the best Pantaloons. Darbes, on
one occasion, ventured to play this character in one of Goldoni
characters, without a mask, and which, we are told, was a failure. A
similar attempt was made on the English stage, which I have previously
referred to.

Mention has been previously made of females appearing on the stage
during the Grecian and Roman periods. From this, however, there arose on
the Italian stage, in after years, the _Servetta_ or _Fantesca_, a kind
of waiting maid, or "accomplished companion" part, and called later, in
France, _Soubrette_, and the origin of which, in all probability, can be
traced to the _Mimas_ of _Pantomimus_.

In the sixteenth century mention is made of a troupe of performers known
as _Amorosos_ or _Innamortos_, appearing in Italy. Those who only
appeared in the female parts were known as Colombina, Oliva, Fianetta,
Pasquella, and Nespella. Columbina's part, the "accomplished companion,"
like the _Vita_ of the Indian Drama, was sometimes that of mistress, and
sometimes that of maid. Up to 1560 women were unknown on the Italian
stage. In England just one hundred years later.

Three generations of the family of Biancolelli, the Harlequin,
grandmother, grand-daughter, and great grand-daughter appeared as
Columbines in France. The most talented was Catherine, the daughter of
Dominique, and she made her _debut_ in 1683, in "_Arlequin Protee_,"
with great success.

About 1695, Columbine appeared in a parti-coloured gown like a female
Harlequin, and in the piece "_Le Retour de la foie de Besons_," acted at
the Comedie Italiene. As the innovation was much liked, the part of
Columbine came to be dressed like the Harlequin. The Columbine dressed
in short muslin skirts is a creation of modern times. In the French
Comedies Columbine was often Harlequin's wife, but she never had the
powers of a magical wand.

In the old form of Pantomime there were many other personages in these
dumb shows which we never had in the English Pantomimes. To note a few
of them:--The Captain, a bragging swash-buckler; the Apothecary, a
half-starved individual with a red nose; and a female _soubrette_, who
acted for her mistress, Columbine, similar duties as what Clown
performed as valet for his master. The Doctor brought at first on the
stage in 1560, was supposed to be a lawyer or a physician. From 1560 his
dress was that of a professor's, a short, black tunic, stockings, and a
black mask covering the forehead and nose. Another, Facanappa, had a
long parrot nose, surmounted by a pair of green spectacles, a flat hat,
with a broad brim, a waistcoat covered with tinsel, and a long white
coat with large pockets. Like the Clown of our early English plays, and
like his ancestors, the _Atellans_ and _Mimes_, he had the privilege of
making allusions from the stage, in what, I suppose, were something like
the Interludes. Il Barone is another variety. He was a Sicilian lord,
deceived by his daughter, and also duped by his valets. "_Il Barone_"
was a favourite subject for another form of "Miming," that of the
wooden figures called Marionettes.

Marionette entertainments were known both to the Greeks and the Romans.
The adventures of "_Don Juan_" and "_Don Giovanni_," of the Italian
Opera, in all probability sprang originally from the adventures of Punch
in the puppet shows.

Puppet shows introduced into France (_temp._ Charles IX.) from Italy,
where they were and are still known as _Fantoccini_, by Marion--hence
their name--and then into this country, are mentioned by Shakespeare,
Pepys, Jonson, Swift, and the Essayists.

Puppet shows, in this country, were formerly known as "Motions."
Shakespeare's Antolycus frequented fairs and the like, and he also
composed a "Motion" of "The Prodigal Son." Mystery plays were also
represented by puppets.

In England, especially at Bartholomew Fair, they were always very
popular, and the chief survivor of this form of "dumb show" is "Mr.
Punch" of our streets, whose ancient history I have briefly mentioned in
another chapter, but not that of "Mrs. Punch," on whose history I am
unable--however so brief--to throw any light.

Let us now, dear reader, return to England, and trace in this country
something more of the History of Pantomime, and for which we will now
open another chapter.




CHAPTER XIII.

Italian Scenarios and English "Platts"--Pantaloon--Tarleton, the
Clown--Extemporal Comedy--The Poet Milton--Ben Jonson--The
Commonwealth--"A Reign of Dramatic Terror"--Robert Cox and his "Humours"
and "Drolleries"--The Restoration.


It has been thought that our dramatic poet, Massinger, drew upon the
Italian Comedy for the humour of some of his plays. That there was some
form of intercourse between the English and Italian stage is shown by
the discovery of one of the Italian Scenarios, or "Platts," as we know
them, at Dulwich College, which discovery Steevens describes as "a
mysterious fragment of ancient stage direction, and of a species of
dramatic entertainment which no memorial is preserved in any annals of
the English stage." The "Platt," written in a large hand, "And
containing directions, was thought to have been affixed near the
prompter's stand, and it has even an oblong hole in its centre to admit
of being suspended on a wooden peg (Disraeli). On it, and in a familiar
way, appear the names of the players, such as: Pigg, White and Black,
Dick and Sam, Little Will Barne, Jack Gregory, and the Red-faced
fellow."

A "Platt" of the "Seven Deadly Sinnes," supposed to have been written by
Dick Tarleton, the famous Clown, is preserved, I believe, in Dulwich
College. It consists of a pasteboard fifteen inches high, and nine in
breadth, and on it is written, in two columns, the following:--

"A tent being placed on the stage for Henry the Sixth; he in it asleep.
To him the lieutenant, and a pursuivant (R. Cowley, Jo. Duke), and one
warder (R. Pallant). To them Pride, Gluttony, Wrath, and Covetousness at
one door; at another door Envy, Sloth, and Lechery. The three put back
the four, and so _exeunt_.

"Henry awaking, enter a keeper (J. Sinclair), to him a servant (T. Belt),
to him Lidgate and the keeper. _Exit_, then enter again--then Envy
passeth over the stage. Lidgate speaks."

These "Platts" were, in all probability, one of the first written forms
of Pantomimic entertainments known in England, and borrowed, as
mentioned, from the Scenarios of the Italians. That form of home
amusement well-known in family circles, "Acting Charades," may be
likened to them.

To get all the information that we can obtain of the "Platts," I am sure
I cannot do better than quote the words of Mr. Isaac Disraeli, well
assured that they will be more acceptable than any I can make.

Some of these "Platts" are on solemn subjects, like the tragic
Pantomimes; and in some appear "Pantaloon, and his man Peascod, with
_spectacles_." Steevens observes, that he met with no earlier example of
the appearance of Pantaloon, as a specific character on our stage; and
that this direction concerning "the spectacles" cannot fail to remind
the reader of a celebrated passage in "As you like it." (Scene 6, Act
II.).

                ... "The sixth age shifts
    Into the lean and slippered pantaloon;
    With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side;
    His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide
    For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
    Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
    And whistles in his sound."

Perhaps, he adds, Shakespeare alludes to this personage, as habited in
his own time. The old age of Pantaloon is marked by his leanness, and
his spectacles and his slippers. He always runs after Harlequin, but
cannot catch him; as he runs in slippers and without spectacles, is
liable to pass him by without seeing him. Can we doubt that this
Pantaloon had come from the Italian theatre, after what we have already
said? Does not this confirm the conjecture, that there existed an
intercourse between the Italian theatre and our own? Further, Tarleton,
the comedian, celebrated for his "Extemporal wit," was the writer or
inventor of one of these "Platts." Stow records of one of our actors
that "he had a quick, delicate, refined _Extemporal wit_." And Howes,
the continuator of Stow's Chronicles of another, that "he had a
wondrous, plentiful, pleasant, _Extemporal_ wit."

Praiseworthy reference is also made of Tarleton in "Kinde-Hart's
Dream," 4to., published in 1592. In 1611 a book was published entitled
"Tarleton's Jeasts." Tarleton was so celebrated in his time that his
portrait was hung out as a sign for alehouses. "To sit with Tarleton on
an ale-post's signe," observes Bishop Hall in his satires. Oldys, in his
M.S. notes, mentions that "There is an alehouse sign of a tabor and pipe
man, with the name of Tarleton under it, in the borough of Southwark,
and it was taken from the print before the old 4to. book of 'Tarleton's
Jeasts;' and Lord Oxford had a portrait of him with his tabor and pipe,
which was probably taken from the pamphlet called 'Tarleton's Jeasts,'
on the title page of which there is a wooden plate of Tarleton, at full
length in his Clown's dress, playing on his pipe with one hand, and
beating his drum with the other."

These actors then (continues Mr. Disraeli), who were in the habit of
exercising their impromptus, resembled those who performed in the
unwritten comedies of the Italians. Gabriel Harvey, the Aristarchus of
the day, compliments Tarleton for having brought forward a _new species
of dramatic exhibition_. If this compliment paid to Tarleton merely
alludes to his dexterity at _extemporaneous wit_ in the character of the
_Clown_, as my friend Mr. Douce thinks, this would be sufficient to show
that he was attempting to introduce on our stage the Extemporal Comedy
of the Italians, which Gabriel Harvey distinguishes as "a new species."
As for these "Platts," which I shall not venture to call "Scenarios,"
they surprise by their bareness, conveying no notion of the piece
itself, though quite sufficient for the actors. They consist of mere
exits and entrances of the actors, and often the real names of the
actors are familiarly mixed with those of the _dramatis personae_.
Steevens has justly observed, however, on these skeletons, that although
"The drift of these dramatic pieces cannot be collected from the mere
outlines before us, yet we must not charge them with absurdity. Even the
scenes of Shakespeare would have worn as unpromising an aspect, had
their skeletons only been discovered." The printed _Scenarios_ of the
Italian theatre were not more intelligible; exhibiting only the _hints_
for scenes.

Thus, I think, we have sufficient evidence of an intercourse subsisting
between the English and Italian theatres, not hitherto suspected; and I
find an allusion to these Italian Pantomimes, by the great town-wit Tom
Nash, in his "Pierce Pennilesse," which shows that he was well
acquainted with their nature. He, indeed, exults over them, observing
that our plays are "honourable and full of gallant resolution, not
consisting, like theirs, of Pantaloon, a Zany, and a w---e (alluding to
the women actors of the Italian stage); but of emperors, kings, and
princes." My conviction is still confirmed, when I find that Stephen
Gosson wrote the comedy of "Captain Mario;" it has not been printed, but
"Captain Mario" is one of the Italian characters.

Even at a later period, the influence of these performances reached the
greatest name in the English Parnassus. One of the great actors and
authors of these pieces, who published eighteen of these irregular
productions, was Andreini, whose name must have the honour of being
associated with Milton's, for it was his comedy or opera which threw the
first spark of the "Paradise Lost" into the soul of the epic poet--a
circumstance which will hardly be questioned by those who have examined
the different schemes and allegorical personages of the first projected
drama of "Paradise Lost": nor was Andreini, as well as many others of
this race of Italian dramatists, inferior poets. The Adamo of Andreini
was a personage sufficiently original and poetical to serve as the model
of the Adam of Milton. The youthful English poet, at its representation,
carried it away in his mind. Wit, indeed, is a great traveller; and thus
also the "Empiric" of Massinger might have reached us from the Bolognese
Dottore.

The late Mr. Hole, the ingenious writer on the "Arabian Nights,"
observed to me that Moliere, it must be presumed, never read Fletcher's
plays, yet his "_Bourgeois Gentilhomme_," and the other's "Noble
Gentleman," bear in some instances a great resemblance. Both may have
been drawn from the same Italian source of comedy which I have here
indicated.

Many years after this article was written, appeared "The History of
English Dramatic Poetry," by Mr. Collier. That very laborious
investigator has an article on "Extemporal Plays and Plots," iii., 393.
The nature of these "Platts" or "Plots," he observes, "Our theatrical
antiquaries have not explained." The truth is that they never suspected
their origin in the Italian "Scenarios." My conjectures are amply
confirmed by Mr. Collier's notices of the intercourse of our players
with the Italian actors. Whetstone's Heptameron, in 1582, mentions "The
comedians of Ravenna, who are not _tied to any written device_." In
Kyd's Spanish Tragedy the Extemporal Art is described:--

    The Italian tragedians were so sharp of wit,
    That in one hour of meditation
    They would perform anything in action.

These Extemporal plays were witnessed much nearer than in Italy--at the
_Theatre des Italiens_ at Paris--for one of the characters replies:--

    I have seen the like,
    In Paris, among the French tragedians.

Ben Jonson has mentioned the Italian "Extemporal Plays," in his "Case is
Altered"; and an Italian _commediante_ and his company were in London in
1578, who probably let our players into many a secret.

Evil times, with the advent of the Commonwealth, soon fell upon our
theatres, and when they, as well as plays, were suppressed by order of
the Puritan Parliament, some of the actors followed the Royalist cause
(we do not hear of any taking the side of the Parliament), and lost
their lives fighting for the king. Others attempted to enact plays in
secret, but these performances more often than not, caused the actors
incarceration in some prison. At Holland House, in Kensington, many of
these secret performances, by the aid of bribery, took place. To give
timely warning of the performances Mr. Wright, in his "_Historia
Histronica_," mentions that "Alexander Goff, the woman-actor, was the
jackal to give notice of time and place to the lovers of the drama."

All this however, could not, and would not, keep the spirit of the drama
alive. The theatres were, we know, totally suppressed, "so there might
be no more plaies acted." Play-goers there were, as I have shown, but
they never knew when, in witnessing a performance, they might be seized
by the military, to be fined or imprisoned, or perhaps both. A more
lengthy reign of "Dramatic Terror" than what we had at this period,
would, in all probability, have left us little or no trace of the Drama
of this country. But a saviour was at hand, and that was Pantomime.

Pantomime, as previously stated, kept alive for ages, after the downfall
of the Roman Empire, the Dramatic Art, and during the Commonwealth of
this country, it practically did the same for us.

Owing to the exigences of the times, one Robert Cox, an actor of
considerable genius, after the fashion of the Extemporal Comedies of
Italy, invented a series of dramatic exhibitions at the Red Bull Theatre
(where the first English actress made her appearance December 8, 1660)
and elsewhere, under the guise of rope-dancing, a number of comic scenes
from Shakespeare, Shirley, Marston, Beaumont, and Fletcher, and others.
Cox's exhibitions, known as "Humours" or "Drolleries," were collected by
Marsh, and reprinted (1672) by Francis Kirkman, the author and
book-seller. This collection is entitled "The Wits, or Sport upon Sport,
in select pieces of Drollery, digested into scenes by way of dialogue.
Together with variety of Humours of several nations fitted for the
pleasure and content of all persons, either in Court, City, Country, or
Camp."

Of these "Humours" Kirkman observes, "As meanly as you may now think of
these Drolls, they were then acted by the best comedians; and, I may
say, by some that then exceeded all now living; the incomparable Robert
Cox, who was not only the principal actor, but also the contriver and
author of most of these farces. How I have heard him cried up for his
John Swabber, and Simpleton the Smith; in which he being to appear with
a large piece of bread and butter, I have frequently known several of
the female spectators and auditors to long for it; and once that
well-known natural, Jack Adams of Clerkenwell, seeing him with bread and
butter on the stage, and knowing him, cried out, 'Cuz! Cuz! give me
some!' to the great pleasure of the audience. And so naturally did he
act the smith's part, that being at a fair in a country town, and that
farce being presented the only master-smith of the town came to him,
saying, 'Well, although your father speaks so ill of you, yet when the
fair is done, if you will come and work with me, I will give you twelve
pence a week more than I give any other journeyman.' Thus was he taken
for a smith bred, that was, indeed, as much of any trade."

With the death of the Lord Protector, Cromwell, "The merry rattle of
Monk's drums coming up the Gray's Inn Road, welcomed by thousands of
dusty spectators," the return of Charles II., 1660, and though Charles
was more a lover of the stage than of the drama, the theatre again
recovered its credit, and to vigorously flourish once more.




CHAPTER XIV.

Introduction of Pantomimes to the English Stage--Weaver's "History of
the Mimes and Pantomimes"--Weaver's Pantomimes--The prejudice against
Pantomimes--Booth's counsel.


The year 1702 marks the appearance of the first Pantomime introduced to
the English stage, written by John Weaver, a friend of Addison and
Steele's, and entitled "Tavern Bilkers." It was produced at Drury Lane.

The author was by profession a dancing-master; his name is not to be
found in any biographical dictionary, yet, it is evident that the
"little dapper, cheerful man" had brains in his head as well as talent
in his heels.

John Weaver was the son of a Mr. Weaver, whom the Duke of Ormond, the
Chancellor of Oxford, licensed in 1676 to exercise the profession of a
dancing-master within the university. The date of his birth is unknown,
but we first hear of him as stage-managing the production of his own
Pantomime at Drury Lane, 1702, an entertainment which he described as
one of "dancing, action, and motion." The latter would appear to have
been a failure, as in his "History of the Mimes and Pantomimes,"
published in 1728, Weaver states that his next attempt on similar lines
did not take place until many years afterwards--not until the year 1716,
in fact. In 1716 Weaver was back in London producing two burlesque
Pantomimes, "The Loves of Mars and Venus," and "Perseus and Andromeda."
At Drury Lane, in the following year, "Orpheus and Eurydice," and
"Harlequin Turn'd Judge," was produced, and "Cupid and Bacchus" in 1719.
Weaver also wrote many treatises on dancing, some of which were highly
commended by Steele.

Another Pantomime of Weaver's was "The Judgment of Paris"--date
uncertain--performed by the author's pupils "in the great room over the
Market-house," Shrewsbury--in which town he had taken up his
residence--in the year 1750. John Weaver died September 28th, 1760, and
was buried at St. Chads, Shrewsbury.

The mention above of "Perseus and Andromeda" calls to mind that there
were several pieces of this name. One of them was severely commented on
in "The Grub-Street Journal" of April 8, 1731. Its title was:--"Perseus
and Andromeda; or the Flying Lovers, in five Interludes, three serious
and two comic. The serious composed by Monsieur Roger, the comic by John
Weaver, dancing-masters."

It is only just to assign to Weaver the entire credit of being the first
to introduce Pantomimes on the English stage, though the author's
original bent was "scenical dancing," or ballet dancing, by
representations of historical incidents with graceful motion. In his
"History of Pantomimes" the author is careful to distinguish between
those entertainments where "Grin and grimace usurp the passions and
affections of the mind," and those where "A nice address and management
of the passions take up the thoughts of the performer." "Spectators,"
says Weaver, in 1730, or thereabouts, "are now so pandering away their
applause on interpolations of pseudo-players, merry Andrews, tumblers,
and rope dancers; and are but rarely touched with, or encourage a
natural player or just Pantomime."

It was, however, left to John Rich to place Pantomime on a firm footing.
Before dealing with Rich and his Pantomimes, which I shall treat of in
the next chapter, it is appropriate here to note how Pantomimes
generally came to be introduced on the English stage.

Colley Cibber mentions:--About this time the patentee (Rich) having very
near finished his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, began to think of
forming a new company; and, in the meantime, found it necessary to apply
for leave to employ them. By the weak defence he had always made against
the several attacks upon his interests, and former Government of the
theatre (Drury Lane), it might be a question, if his house had been
ready, in the Queen's (Anne) time, whether he would then have had the
spirit to ask, or interest enough to obtain leave to use it; but in the
following reign, as it did not appear he had done anything to forfeit
the right of his patent, he prevailed with Mr. Craggs, the younger, to
lay his case before the king, which he did in so effectual a manner that
(as Mr. Craggs himself told me) his Majesty was pleased to say upon it,
"That he remembered when he had been in England before, in King
Charles's time, there had been two theatres in London; and as the patent
seemed to be a lawful grant, he saw no reason why two play-houses might
not be continued."

The suspension of the patent being thus taken off, the younger multitude
seemed to call aloud for two play-houses! Many desired another, from the
common notion, that two would always create emulation, in the actors.
Others too were as eager for them, from the natural ill-will that
follows the fortunate or prosperous in any undertaking. Of this low
malevolence we had, now and then, remarkable instances; we had been
forced to dismiss an audience of a hundred and fifty pounds, from a
disturbance spirited up, by obscure people, who never gave any better
reason for it than that it was their fancy to support the idle complaint
of one rival actress against another, in their several pretensions to
the chief part in a new tragedy. But as this tumult seemed only to be
the wantonness of English liberty, I shall not presume to lay any
further censure upon it.

Now, notwithstanding this public desire of re-establishing two houses;
and though I have allowed the former actors greatly our superiors; and
the managers I am speaking of not to have been without their private
errors, yet under all these disadvantages, it is certain, the stage, for
twenty years before this time, had never been in so flourishing a
condition.

But, in what I have said, I would not be understood to be an advocate
for two play-houses; for we shall soon find that two sets of actors,
tolerated in the same place, have constantly ended in the corruption of
the theatre; of which the auxiliary entertainments, that have so
barbarously supplied the defects of weak action, have, for some years
past, been a flagrant instance; it may not, therefore, be here improper
to shew how our childish Pantomimes first came to take so gross a
possession of the stage.

I have upon several occasions, already observed, that when one company
is too hard for another, the lower in reputation has always been forced
to exhibit fine newfangled foppery, to draw the multitude after them; of
these expedients, singing and dancing had formerly been most effectual;
but, at the time I am speaking of, our English music had been so
discountenanced since the taste of Italian Operas prevailed, that it was
to no purpose to pretend to it. Dancing, therefore, was now the only
weight, in the opposite scale, and as the new theatre sometimes found
their account in it, it could not be safe for us wholly to neglect it.

Cibber's antagonistical views towards Pantomime were shared, as we
shall see, by a good many others.

Booth, however, a greater actor than Cibber, and a tragedian to boot,
took a more business-like view of the proceedings, thinking thin houses
the greatest indignity the stage could suffer. "Men of taste and
judgment (said he) must necessarily form but a small proportion of the
spectators at a theatre, and if a greater number of people were enticed
to sit out a play because a Pantomime was tacked to it, the Pantomime
did good service to all concerned. Besides, if people of position and
taste could, if so minded, leave before the nonsense commenced--an
opportunity they do not seem to have embraced since Booth reminded the
opponents of Pantomime how Italian opera had drawn the nobility and
gentry away from the play-houses, as appeared by the melancholy
testimony of their receipts, until Pantomime came to the rescue when pit
and gallery were better filled, and the boxes too put on a nobler
appearance."




CHAPTER XV.

John Rich and his Pantomimes--Rich's Miming---Garrick, Walpole,
Foote--Anecdotes of Rich--Pope--The dance of infernals in "Harlequin
Sorcerer"--Drury Lane--Colley Cibber--Henry Fielding, the
Novelist--Contemporary Writers' opinion of Pantomime--Woodward, the
Harlequin--The meaning of the word Actor--Harlequins--"Dr. Faustus," a
description--William Rufus Chetwood--Accidents--Vandermere, the
Harlequin--"Orpheus and Eurydice" at Covent Garden--A description--Sam.
Hoole, the machinist--Prejudice against Pantomime--Mrs. Oldfield--Robert
Wilks--Macklin--Riot at Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre--Death of Rich.


It was in 1717 that Rich devised this new form of entertainment, though
it was not till 1724, when "The Necromancer, or History of Dr. Faustus"
was produced by Rich, which took the town by storm, that Pantomime
became such a rage. It has been stated that what induced Rich to turn
his attention to Pantomime was the bringing over of a German, named
Swartz, who had two performing dogs that could dance. They were engaged
at L10 a night; and brought full houses. However, be this as it may, in
the "Daily Courant," of December 20, 1717, we find him, advertising for
his "Italian Mimic Scenes"--as he, for long enough, so termed his
Pantomimes--as follows:--

      "Harlequin Executed: a new Italian Mimic Scene between a
      Scaramouch, a Harlequin, a Country Farmer, his Wife, and
      others."


Of Rich and his early Pantomimes, Davies observes:--

John Rich was the son of Christopher Rich, formerly patentee of Drury
Lane Theatre, and he imbibed from his father a _dislike of people with
whom he was obliged to live and converse_. His father wished to acquire
wealth by French dancers and Italian singers, than by the united skill
of the most accomplished comedians. The son inherited the same taste,
and when he came into the patent, with his brother Christopher, of Drury
Lane, and after having ineffectually tried his talent for acting in the
part of the Earl of Essex, and other important characters, he applied
himself to the study of Pantomimical representations at Lincoln's Inn
Fields Theatre. To retrieve the credit of his theatre Rich created a
species of dramatic composition unknown to this, and, I believe, to any
other country, which he called Pantomime. It consisted of two parts, one
serious, the other comic; by the help of gay scenes, fine habits, grand
dances, appropriate music, and other decorations, he exhibited a story
from "Ovid's Metamorphosis," or some other fabulous history. Between the
pauses of the acts he interwove a comic fable, consisting chiefly of the
courtship of Harlequin and Columbine, with a variety of surprising
adventures and tricks, which were produced by the magic wand of
Harlequin; such as the sudden transformation of palaces and temples to
huts and cottages; of men and women into wheelbarrows and joint stools;
of trees turned to houses; colonnades to beds of tulips; and mechanics'
hops into serpents and ostriches.

It is a most remarkable fact that the Pantomimes that Rich brought out,
all of them could be written down as successes. In the exhibition of his
Pantomimes, Mr. Rich always displayed the greatest taste. He had also
acquired a considerable reputation as a performer of the motley hero
under the name of "Lun Junr," as he was so designated on the bills at
that time, and he was the first performer who rendered the character of
Harlequin at all intelligible in this country. To others he taught the
art of silent, but expressive, action, the interpreter of the mind.
Feeling was pre-eminent in his Miming; and he used to render the scene
of a separation with Columbine as graphic as it was affecting. Excellent
were his "statue scenes" and his "catching the butterfly;" so also were
his other dumb show performances.

Of Rich, Garrick wrote:--

    "When Lun appeared with matchless art and whim,
    He gave the power of speech to every limb;
    Though masked and mute conveyed his quick intent,
    And told in frolic's gestures all he meant."

Rich, however, erred in thinking himself a better actor than a
Pantomimist; and, in fact, he thought himself a finer actor than the
great Garrick himself. "You should see _me_ play Richard!" was a
favourite cry of his.

In 1782, after seeing the Pantomime of "Robinson Crusoe," Walpole said,
"How unlike the Pantomimes of Rich, which were full of wit, and
coherent, and carried on by a story."

As I have shown above, Rich had, like many other people, his own
particular little idiosyncrasies, and when in the season 1746-7 he
netted nearly L9,000 from his Pantomimes, to the chagrin of Garrick and
Quin, he was very angry and much annoyed because he, as Harlequin, had
contributed little or nothing. Another mannerism of his was to despise
the regular drama on these occasions, and he has been known to look at
the packed audience through a small hole in the curtain, and then
ejaculate, "Ah! you are there, you fools, are you? Much good may it do
you!"

Rich used to address everyone as "Mister." On one occasion Foote, being
incensed at being so addressed, asked Rich why he did not call him by
his name. "Don't be angry," says Rich, "I sometimes forget my own name."
"I know," replied Foote, "that you can't write your own name, but I
wonder you should forget it."

The first of Rich's successes was "Harlequin Sorcerer." On its
production Pope wrote:--

    "Behold a sober sorcerer rise
    Swift to whose wand a winged volume flies;
    All sudden, gorgon's hiss and dragon's glare,
    And ten horned fiends and giants rush to war.
    Hell rises, heaven descends, and dance on earth,
    Gods, imps and monsters, music, rage and mirth,
    A fire, a jig, a battle, and a ball,
    Till one wide conflagration swallows all;
    Thence a new world to nature's laws unknown,
    Breaks out refulgent with a heaven its own;
    Another Cynthia her new journey runs,
    And other planets circle after suns.
    The forests dance, the rivers upwards rise,
    Whales sport in woods, and dolphins in the skies;
    At last, to give the whole creation grace,
    Lo! one vast egg produces human race."

Of Harlequin, in "Harlequin Sorcerer," being hatched from an egg by the
rays of the sun. This has been called a master-piece of Rich's Miming
"From the first chipping of the egg (says Jackson) his receiving of
motion, his feeling of the ground, his standing upright, to his quick
Harlequin trip round the empty shell, through the whole progression,
every limb had its tongue, and every motion a voice."

As probably occurring in "Harlequin Sorcerer," there is an amusing
incident. The belief in the possibility of a supernatural appearance on
the stage existed (says an old writer) about the beginning of the
eighteenth century. A dance of infernals having to be exhibited, they
were represented in dresses of black and red, with fiery eyes and snaky
locks, and garnished with every pendage of horror. They were twelve in
number. In the middle of their performance, while intent upon the figure
in which they had been completely practised, an actor of some humour,
who had been accommodated with a spare dress, appeared among them. He
was, if possible, more terrific than the rest, and seemed to the
beholders as designed by the conductor for the principal fiend. His
fellow furies took the alarm; they knew he did not belong to them, and
they judged him an infernal in earnest. Their fears were excited, a
general panic ensued, and the whole group fled different ways; some to
their dressing-rooms, and others, through the streets, to their own
homes, in order to avoid the destruction which they believed to be
coming upon them, for the profane mockery they had been guilty of. The
odd devil was _non inventus_. He took himself invisibly away, through
fears of another kind. He was, however, seen by many, in imagination, to
fly through the roof of the house, and they fancied themselves almost
suffocated by the stench he had left behind. The confusion of the
audience is scarcely to be described. They retired to their families,
informing them of this supposed appearance of the devil, with many of
his additional frolics in the exploit. So thoroughly was its reality
believed that every official assurance which could be made the following
day did not entirely counteract the idea. The explanation was given by
Rich himself, in the presence of his friend Bencraft, the contriver, and
perhaps the actor of the scheme, which he designed only as an innocent
affair, to confuse the dancers, without adverting to the serious
consequences which succeeded.

I have met with another author, who, in giving an account of this
transaction, places it as a much earlier period, and says it was during
the performance of "Dr. Faustus," and that when the devil took flight he
carried away with him the roof of the theatre. This story may be
alluded to in a very curious work, entitled, "The Blacke Booke" (a
proper depository), "London, printed in black letter, by T.C. for
Jeffery Chorlton, 1604." "The light burning serjant Lucifer" says of
one, running away through fear of fire at a brothel, "Hee had a head of
hayre like one of my divells in 'Doctor Faustus,' when the olde theatre
crakt and frighted the audience."

Emulating Rich, Drury Lane then followed with "Mars and Venus," of which
Colley Cibber says: Was formed into something more than motion without
meaning into a connected presentation of dances in character, wherein
the passions were so happily expressed, and the whole story so
intelligibly told by a mute narration of gesture only, that even
thinking spectators allowed it to be both a pleasing and a rational
entertainment; though, at the same time, from our distrust of its
reception we durst not venture to decorate it with any extraordinary
expense of scenes or habits; but upon the success of this attempt it was
rightly concluded that if a visible expense in both were added to
something of the same nature, it could not fail of drawing the town
proportionately after it.

From this original hint there (but every way unequal to it) sprang forth
that succession of monstrous medlies, that have so long infested the
stage, and which arose upon one another alternately, at both houses,
outvying in expense, like contending bribes on both sides at an
election, to secure a majority of the multitude.

If I am asked (after condemning these fooleries myself) how I came to
assent or continue my share of expense to them? I have no better excuse
for my error, than confessing it. I did it against my conscience, and
had not virtue enough to starve by opposing a multitude that would have
been too hard for me.

("The Drama's laws the Drama's patrons give," has always been an axiom
of the stage; and worthy Colley Cibber, notwithstanding his antagonism,
and the rivalry of Rich, had too good a knowledge of this truism not to
do otherwise but follow the popular voice.)

Notwithstanding then (Cibber continues) this, our compliance with the
vulgar taste, we generally made use of these Pantomimes, but as crutches
to our weakest plays. Nor were we so lost to all sense of what was
valuable, as to dishonor our best authors in such bad company. We still
had a due respect to several select plays, that were able to be their
own support; and in which we found constant account, without painting
and patching them out.... It is a reproach to a sensible people to let
folly so quickly govern their pleasures.

Henry Fielding, the novelist, was one of Harlequin's assailants. "The
comic part of the English Pantomimes," he says, "being duller than
anything before shown on the stage could only be set off by the
superlative dulness of the serious portion, in which the gods and
goddesses were so insufferably tedious, that Harlequin was always a
relief from still worse company." Eager for theatrical reform, the
"Weekly Miscellany" of 1732, said that plays were not intended for
tradesmen, and denounced Pantomimes as infamous.

Another competitor, who entered the lists against Rich, was Thormond, a
dancing-master, and at Drury Lane Theatre he produced "Dr. Faustus," in
1733. Speaking of this Pantomime, Pasquin mentions that "An account is
very honestly published, to save people the trouble of going to see it."

In a Pantomime produced at Drury Lane in the following year, there were
Macklin, Theo. Cibber (who ultimately lost his life by shipwreck in the
Irish Sea, in company with a troupe of Pantomimists), Mrs. Clive, and
Mrs. Cibber. At the performance it was announced that the money paid
would be returned to anyone who went out before the overture; but no one
availed themselves of the concession. Commenting on the occurrence, a
contemporary writer observes:--"Happy is it that we live in an age of
taste, when the dumb eloquence and natural wit and humour of Harlequin
are justly preferred to the whining of Tragedy, or the vulgarity of
Comedy."

Garrick, at Drury Lane, finding his audience with no heart for tragedy,
and that they must have Pantomime, very wisely said, "If you won't come
to 'Lear' and 'Hamlet,' I must give you Harlequin." And Harlequin he
did give them, in the person of Woodward, one of the best of Harlequins
that ever trod the stage. A contemporary print of the time, represents
Woodward being weighed in one scale, with all the great actors of the
day in the other, and Woodward makes them all kick the beam.

To satirise the prevailing fashion, Garrick penned the following:--

    They in the drama find no joys,
    But doat on mimicry and toys;
    Thus, when a dance is on my bill,
    Nobility my boxes fill;
    Or send three days before the time
    To crowd a new-made Pantomime.

Garrick's success, however, was, I am of opinion, undoubtedly owing to
his being such a clever Pantomimist. "We saw him," says Grimm, "play the
dagger scene in 'Macbeth' in a room in his ordinary dress, without any
stage illusion; and, as he followed with his eyes the air-drawn dagger,
he became so grand that the assembly broke into a cry of general
admiration. Who would believe that this same man, a moment after,
counterfeited, with equal perfection, a pastry cook's boy, who, carrying
a tray of tartlets on his head, and gaping about him at the corner of
the street, lets his tray fall, and, at first stupified by the accident,
bursts at last into a fit of crying?"

All our great actors have been good Mimics, and herein, doubtless, lies
the secret of their success. The mere intonation of words unaccompanied
by a strict knowledge of "that dumb, silent language," Pantomime, is
only _parroting_. Herein, therefore, lies the true imitativeness of the
actor, and _the natural form of acting_. The word actor "Is a name only
given to the persons in a dramatic work, _because they ought to be in
continual action during the performance of it_." It does not mean that
the actor is to stand still, and to be in action only with his tongue
when speaking his "lines." No! he bears the honoured name of actor, and
he should bring the full power of gesture language--Pantomime--that he
has at his control into play in order to be convincing in the character
that, for the time being, he is.

Action (mentions Betterton, in his "History of the English Stage,"
1741), can never be in its perfection but on the stage. Action, indeed,
has a natural excellence in it superior to all other qualities; action
is motion, and motion is the support of nature, which without it would
sink into the sluggish mass of chaos. Life is motion, and when that
ceases, the human body so beautiful, nay so divine, when enlivened by
motion, becomes a dead and putrid corpse, from which all turn their
eyes. The eye is caught by anything in motion, but passes over the
sluggish and motionless things as not the pleasing object of its view.

The natural power of motion, or action, is the reason that the
attention of the audience is fixed by any irregular, or even fantastic
action, on the stage, of the most indifferent player; and supine and
drowsy when the best actor speaks without the addition of action. The
stage ought to be the seat of passion in its various kinds, and,
therefore, the actors ought to be thoroughly acquainted with the whole
nature of the affections, and habits of the mind, or else they will
never be able to express them justly in their looks and gestures, as
well as in the tone of their voice and manner of utterance. They must
know them in their various mixtures, as they are differently blended
together in the different characters they represent; and then that
excellent rule in the "Essay on Poetry" will be of equal use to the poet
and player:--

    Who must look within to find
    These _secret_ turns of Nature in the mind;
    Without this part in vain would be the whole,
    And but a _body_ all without a soul?

A few words more just to lay further stress on the importance of
Pantomime, and then to return to our History. Take any part in any play,
strip from it in its enactment the whole of its gesture language, could
we realise that the actor appearing in it was portraying nature for us?
Replace the Pantomime so essential to the part, and the character
becomes--or rather should become if properly played--a creature of flesh
and blood the same as ourselves. Pantomime, on the other hand, does not
require words to be spoken to express its meaning, as it is quite
expressible without.

A contemporary account of the production of the Pantomime "Harlequin Dr.
Faustus," at Drury Lane Theatre, forms interesting reading, in addition
to providing a contrast with present-day Pantomime.

Every action is executed to different agreeable music, so adapted that
it properly expresses what is going forward; in the machinery there is
something so highly surprising that words cannot give a full idea of it.
The effects described seem to be marvellous, considering the state of
theatrical mechanism. A devil riding on a fiery dragon rides swiftly
across the stage. Two country men and women enter to be told their
fortunes, when Dr. Faustus waves his wand, and four pictures turn out of
the scenes opposite, representing a judge and a soldier, a dressed lady,
and a lady in riding habit; the scene changes to the outside of a
handsome house, when the louting men, running in, place their backs
against the door. The front of the house turns, and at the same instant
the machine turns, a supper ready dressed rises up. The countrymen's
wives remain with the Doctor, who (afterwards) goes out. He beckons the
table, and it follows him. Punch, Scaramouch, and Pierrot are next met
by the Doctor, who invites them into a banquet. The table ascends into
the air. He waves his wand, and asses' ears appear at the sides of their
heads. A usurer lending money to Dr. Faustus demands a limb as
security, and cuts off the Doctor's leg, several legs appear on the
scene, and the Doctor strikes a woman's leg with his wand, which
immediately flies from the rest, and fixes to the Doctor's stump, who
dances with it ridiculously. The next scene opens, disclosing the
Doctor's study. He enters affrighted, and the clock strikes one; the
figures of Time and Death appear. Several devils enter and tear him in
pieces, some sink, some fly out, each bearing a limb of him. The last,
which is the grand scene, is the most magnificent that ever appeared on
the English stage--all the gods and goddesses discovered with the
apotheosis of Diana, ascending into the air.

The tricks that formed part and parcel of the Pantomimes, in causing
surprise and wonderment, placed Harlequin, for his extraordinary feats,
in the first rank of magicians. Oftentimes, however, they were the cause
of many accidents.

Chetwood--William Rufus Chetwood--who had, in the eighteenth century, a
bookseller's shop in Covent Garden, and was, for twenty years, prompter
for Drury Lane, a writer of four plays, and a volume of sketches of the
actors whom he had met, says:--"A tumbler at the Haymarket beat the
breath out of his body by an accident, and which raised such vociferous
applause that lasted the poor man's life, for he never breathed more.
Indeed, his wife had this comfort, when the truth was known, pity
succeeded to the roar of applause. Another accident occurred in the
Pantomime of 'Dr. Faustus' (previously referred to), at Lincoln's Inn
Fields Theatre, where a machine in the working threw the mock Pierrot
down headlong with such force that the poor man broke a plank on the
stage with his fall, and expired; another was sorely maimed that he did
not survive many days; and a third, one of the softer sex, broke her
thigh."

Vandermere, the Harlequin, one of the most agile that ever trod the
stage, on one occasion, in the pursuit by the Clown, leaped through a
window on to the stage, a full thirteen feet. Performing at the Dublin
theatre one night, having a prodigious leap to make, the persons behind
the scenes not being ready to receive him in the customary blanket, he
fell upon the stage and was badly bruised. This accident occasioned him
to take a solemn oath that he would never take another leap upon the
stage; nor did he violate his oath, for when he afterwards played
Harlequin another actor of his size, and of considerable activity was
equipped with the parti-coloured habit, and when a leap was necessary
Vandermere passed off on one side of the stage as Dawson--Vandermere's
understudy--entered at the other, and undertook it.

How little do we know of the tragic ending of these poor unhappy
Pantomimists' lives. Their names even have not been handed down to us,
and they, like probably many more with whose quips and quiddities we
have laughed at with infinite zest, have long since gone "to that bourne
from whence no traveller returns," and perhaps, "unwept, unhonoured, and
unsung."

On February 12, 1739, Rich produced, at Covent Garden (opened in
December 1732, with Congreve's "Way of the World"), "Orpheus and
Eurydice." On the mounting something like L2,000 were spent.

Rich devised the scenario and comic scenes. Lewis Theobald wrote the
libretto, and George Lambert--founder of the Beefsteak Club--painted the
scenery. Hippisley played Clown, Manager Rich was the Harlequin, and
Signor Grimaldi, father of the celebrated Mime, to be noted further on,
was the Pantaloon. This is the first instance of a member of the
Grimaldi family (says Mr. W.J. Lawrence) appearing in English Pantomime.

The following was the argument and the curious arrangement of the
scenes:--Interlude I.--Rhodope, Queen of Thrace, practising art magic,
makes love to Orpheus. He rejects her love. She is enraged. A serpent
appears who receives Rhodope's commands, and these ended, glides off the
stage. Here the comic part begins. In the Opera (as practically it was)
a scene takes place between Orpheus and Eurydice. Eurydice's heel is
pierced by the serpent, behind the scenes. She dies on the stage--after
which the comic part is continued. Interlude II. Scene: Hell. Pluto and
Orpheus enter. Orpheus prevails on Pluto to restore Eurydice to him.
Ascalox tells Orpheus that Eurydice shall follow him, but that if he
should look back at her before they shall have passed the bounds of
Hell, she will die again. Orpheus turns back to look for Eurydice,
Fiends carry her away. After this the comic part is resumed. Interlude
III.--Orpheus again rejects Rhodope's solicitations. Departs. The scene
draws, and discovers Orpheus slain. Several Baccants enter in a
triumphant manner. They bring in the lyre and chaplet of Orpheus.
Rhodope stabs herself. The piece concludes with the remainder of the
comic part.

"'The Scots Magazine' for March, 1740, says:--'Orpheus and Eurydice'
draws the whole town to Covent Garden, whether for the Opera itself (the
words of which are miserable stuff) or for the Pantomimical Interlude,
with which it is intermixed, I cannot determine. The music is pretty
good, and the tricks are not foolisher than usual, and some have said
that they have more meaning than most that have preceded them. The
performance is grand as to the scenery. What pleases everybody is a
regular growth of trees, represented more like nature than what has yet
been seen upon the stage, and the representation of a serpent so lively
as to frighten half the ladies who see it. It is, indeed, curious in its
kind, being wholly a piece of machinery, that enters, performs its
exercise of head, body, and tail in a most surprising manner, and makes
behind the curtain with a velocity scarcely credible. It is about a foot
and a half in circumference of the thickest part, and far exceeds the
former custom of stuffing a bag into such likeness. It is believed to
have cost more than L200; and when the multitude of wings, springs,
etc., whereof it consists, are considered, the charge will not appear
extravagant. The whole Royal family have been to see this performance;
and, from what can be judged, everybody else will see it before the end
of the season, the house being every day full at 3 o'clock, though
seldom empty till after eleven."

Sam Hoole--father of the translator of Tasso and Ariosto--was Rich's
chief machinist at this period, and the inventor of this famous serpent.
He had, according to Cumberland, a shop where he sold mechanical toys.
Having a large stock of serpent toys left on his hands he became a
ruined and bankrupt man.

"Orpheus and Eurydice" was revived by Rich in 1747, and again in 1755;
when it ran 31 nights. In 1768 it was reproduced by his successors at
Covent Garden. In October, 1787, it was again put in the bill, and this
time by Royal Command, it was said.

Of the number of Pantomimes brought out by Rich I shall not dilate on,
and those that I have referred to will, doubtless, show what all these
"plays without words" were like.

During the summer season of 1761, at Drury Lane, Murphy and Foote
endeavoured

    "From Pantomime to free the stage
    And combat all the ministers of the age,"

by ridiculing the popular amusement in having the character of Harlequin
hung in full view of the audience in a play entitled "The Wishes." When
the catastrophe was at hand Murphy whispered to Cumberland: "If they
don't damn this, they deserve to be damned themselves!" No sooner were
the words uttered than a turbulent mob in the pit broke out, and quickly
put an end to the dire fatality with which Pantomime and its hero,
Harlequin, were threatened.

Christopher Rich gave the first engagement to the afterwards celebrated
actress, Mrs. Oldfield, and, previously, a similar kindness to Robert
Wilks, about the year 1690, at the salary of fifteen shillings a week,
with two shillings and sixpence deducted for teaching him to dance.
Another famous performer, Macklin, was also introduced to the stage by
this family.

At the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre, in 1721, there was a memorable
riot, caused by some drunken aristocratic beaux, owing to an alleged
insult, which one of their number was supposed to have received. The
beau referred to, a noble Earl, had crossed the stage whilst Macbeth and
his lady were upon it, in order to speak to a companion who was lolling
in the wings. Rich told the noble Earl that for his indecorum he would
not be allowed behind the scenes again, which so incensed the latter
that he gave Manager Rich a smart slap on the face, which Rich returned.
Swords then were drawn, and between the actors and the beaux a free
fight ensued, which ended in the former driving the latter out of the
theatre. The rioters, however, again obtained access, and rushing into
the boxes, cut down the hangings, besides doing other damage, when, led
by Quin and a number of constables, several of the beaux were captured,
and taken before the magistrates. The end of it all was that the matter
was compromised; but, in order to prevent a recurrence of such
disorderly scenes, a guard should attend the performances. The custom of
having the military in attendance at our theatres--which the above
affray was the primary cause--was in vogue for over a hundred years
after this event.

Rich lived to see Pantomimes firmly established at Drury Lane and Covent
Garden. Drury Lane did, for a few years, discard it in favour of
spectacle, but ultimately found it advisable to return to Pantomime.

At the beginning of the 'sixties of the eighteenth century--1761--died
the father of Harlequins in England, and also--as he has been called--of
English Pantomimes, and there is, I believe, a costly tomb erected to
his memory in Hillingdon Church-yard, Middlesex.

Rich left Covent Garden Theatre to his son-in-law, Beard, the vocalist,
with the not unpleasant restriction, however, that the property should
be sold when L60,000 was bid for it, and for which sum it ultimately
passed into the hands of Harris, Colman, and their partners.




CHAPTER XVI.

Joseph Grimaldi.


The year 1778 marks an epoch in the History of Pantomime, as just over
three-quarters of a century before marked another epoch, the
introduction of Pantomimes to the English stage. On December 18th, 1778,
was born Joseph Grimaldi--afterwards the Prince of Clowns, and the son
of Giuseppe Grimaldi ("Iron Legs"). Joe's first appearance was at
Sadler's Wells on April 16, Easter Monday, 1781, he not being quite
three years old. Dickens, in the "Memoirs of Grimaldi," has given us
from the Clown's own diary, which Grimaldi kept close up to the time of
his death, on May, 31st, 1837, a full and true account of the life of
this remarkably clever Pantomimist. To add to what Dickens has written
of "Only a Clown" (which doubtless the reader is already acquainted
with) would only be like painting the lily; and, perhaps, I cannot do
better in honouring his memory than by quoting the words of Mr. Harley
at the annual dinner of the Drury Lane Fund, spoken in the June
following Grimaldi's death:--"Yet, shall delicacy suffer no violence in
adducing one example, for death has hushed his cock-crowing cachination,
and uproarious merriment. The mortal Jupiter of practical Joke, the
Michael Angelo of buffoonery, who, if he was _Grim-all-day_, was sure to
make you chuckle at night."

A contemporary writer of Grimaldi's days thus eulogises the Prince of
Clowns:--

As a Clown, Mr. Grimaldi is perfectly unrivalled. Other performers of
the part may be droll in their generation; but, which of them can for a
moment compete with the Covent Garden hero in acute observation upon the
foibles and absurdities of society, and his happy talent of holding them
up to ridicule. He is the finest practical satyrist that ever existed.
He does not, like many Clowns, content himself with raising a
horse-laugh by contortions and grimaces, but tickles the fancy, and
excites the risibility of an audience by devices as varied as they are
ingenious. "He uses his folly as a stalking-horse, under cover of which
he shoots his wit;" and fully deserves the encomium bestowed upon him by
Kemble, who, it is said, pronounced him to be "the best low comedian
upon the stage."

There are few things, we think, more delightful than a Pantomime--that
is, a _good_ Pantomime, such as is usually produced at Covent Garden. We
know there are a set of solemn pompous mortals about town, who express
much dignified horror at the absurdities of these things, and declaim
very fluently, in good set terms, upon the necessity of their abolition.
Such fellows as these are ever your dullest of blockheads. Conscious of
their lack of ideas, they think to earn the reputation of men of
sterling sense, by inveighing continually against what _they_ deem to be
frivolity; while they only expose more clearly to all observers the sad
vacuum which exists in their _pericraniums_. Far, far from us be such
dullards, and such opinions; and let us continue to laugh heartily at
our Pantomimes, undisturbed by their tedious harangues; "Do they think,
because they are _wise_, there shall be no more cakes and ale?" The man
who refuses to smile at the humours of Grimaldi is made of bad
materials--_hic niger est_--let no such man be trusted!

Can there possibly be a more captivating sight than that which the
theatre presents nightly, of hundreds of beautiful children all happy
and laughing, "as if a master-spring constrained them all;" and filled
with delight, unalloyed and unbounded, at the performance of one man?
And shall that man go without his due meed of praise? Never be it said!
No, Joey! When we forget thee, may our right hand forget its cunning! We
owe thee much for the delight thou hast already afforded us; and rely
upon thee, with confident expectation, for many a future hour of gay
forgetfulness. Well do we remember, in our boyish dreams of bliss, how
prominent a feature thou didst stand amongst the anticipated enjoyments
of Christmas; how the thoughts of home, of kindred, and release from
school, were rendered ten-fold more delightful by the idea of thy motley
garb and mirth-inspiring voice, which ever formed the greatest enjoyment
our holidays afforded. Heaven be praised, we still are children in some
respects, for we still feel gladdened by thy gambols, as heartily as we
did years ago, when we made our periodical escape from the terrors of
our old pedagogue's frown, and went with Aunt Bridget ("Happier than
ourselves the while") to banquet upon the Pantomimic treat provided for
us. "All wisdom is folly," says the philosopher; but we often incline to
think the converse of the proposition correct, when we see thee put thy
antic disposition on, and set the audience in a roar by the magic of thy
powers.

It is thought by many persons that Grimaldi is seen to greater advantage
on the small stage of Sadler's Wells, than on the more capacious one of
Covent Garden; but, this is an opinion with which we cannot coincide. He
always appears to us more at his ease at the latter house; to come forth
exulting in his power, and exclaiming, "Ay, marry, here my soul hath
elbow-room." His engagement there has certainly been a lucrative
speculation for the proprietors. "Mother Goose," we believe, drew more
money than any other piece which has been produced during the present
century; and no Pantomime since brought forward at Covent Garden has
been unsuccessful; which is mainly to be attributed to his inimitable
performance of Clown. It is scarcely possible for language to do justice
to his unequalled powers of gesture and expression. Do our readers
recollect a Pantomime some years ago, in which he was introduced begging
a tart from a pieman? The simple expression, "May I?" with the look and
action which accompanied it, are impressed upon our recollection, as
forming one of the finest pieces of acting we ever witnessed. Indeed,
let the subject be what it may, it never fails to become highly amusing
in the hands of Grimaldi; whether it is to rob a pieman, or open an
oyster, imitate a chimney-sweep, or a dandy, grasp a red-hot poker, or
devour a pudding, take snuff, sneeze, make love, mimic a tragedian,
cheat his master, pick a pocket, beat a watchman, or nurse a child, it
is all performed in so admirably humorous and extravagantly natural a
manner, that spectators of the most saturnine disposition are
irresistibly moved to laughter.

Mr. Grimaldi also possesses great merit in Pantomimic performances of a
different character, which all are aware of, who have ever seen him in
the melodrama, called "Perouse," and other pieces of the same
description.

We cannot better terminate this article, than with a poetical tribute to
his powers, addressed to him by one of the authors of "Horace in
London," who appears to have had a true relish of his subject:--

    Facetious Mime! thou enemy of gloom,
      Grandson of Momus, blithe and debonair,
    Who, aping Pan, with an inverted broom,
      Can'st brush the cobwebs from the brows of care.

    Our gallery gods immortalize thy song;
      Thy Newgate thefts impart ecstatic pleasure;
    Thou bid'st a Jew's harp charm a Christian throng,
      A Gothic salt-box teem with attic treasure.

    When Harlequin, entangled in thy clue,
      By magic seeks to dissipate the strife,
    Thy furtive fingers snatch his faulchion too;
      The luckless wizard loses wand and wife.

    The fabled egg from thee obtains its gold;
      Thou sett'st the mind from critic bondage loose,
    Where male and female cacklers, young and old,
      Birds of a feather, hail the sacred Goose.

    Even pious souls, from Bunyan's durance free,
      At Sadler's Wells applaud thy agile wit,
    Forget old Care while they remember thee,
      "Laugh the heart's laugh," and haunt the jovial pit.

    Long may'st thou guard the prize thy humour won,
      Long hold thy court in Pantomimic state,
    And, to the equipoise of English fun,
      Exalt the lowly, and bring down the great.

Again we are told "That his Pantomime was such that you could fancy he
would have been the Pulcinello of the Italians, the Harlequin of the
French, that he could have returned a smart repartee from Carlin. His
motions, eccentric as they were, were evidently not a mere lesson from
the gymnasium; there was a will and mind overflowing with, nay living
upon fun, real fun. He was so extravagantly natural, that the most
saturnine looker-on acknowledged his sway; and neither the wise, the
proud, or the fair, the young nor the old, were ashamed to laugh till
tears coursed down their cheeks at Joe and his comicalities."

Grimaldi used sometimes to play in two different Pantomimes at two
different theatres, when he would have to go through some twenty scenes.

Unlike the painting of the face with a few patches adopted by the
modern Clown, Grimaldi used to give one the idea of a greedy boy, who
had covered himself with jam in robbing from a cupboard. Grimaldi
dressed the part like a Clown should be dressed. His trousers were large
and baggy, and were fastened to his jacket, and round his neck he wore a
schoolboy's frill--part of the dress, in all probability, borrowed from
the Spanish Captain and the French Pierrot.

At Drury Lane on Friday, June 27, 1828, he took his farewell benefit.
The following being the bill:--

Mr. Grimaldi's Farewell Benefit,
On Friday, June 27th, 1828,
will be performed
JONATHAN IN ENGLAND,
after which
A MUSICAL MELANGE,
To be succeeded by
THE ADOPTED CHILD,
and concluded by
HARLEQUIN HOAX,
In which Mr. Grimaldi will act Clown in one scene,
sing a song, and speak his
FAREWELL ADDRESS.

With the reader's permisson, I will give, from his "Memoirs," the
address he spoke:--

"Ladies and Gentlemen:--In putting off the Clown's garment, allow me to
drop also the Clown's taciturnity, and address you in a few parting
sentences. I entered early on this course of life, and leave it
prematurely. Eight-and-forty years only have passed over my head--but I
am going as fast down the hill of life as that older Joe--John Anderson.
Like vaulting ambition, I have overleaped myself, and pay the penalty in
an advanced old age. If I have now any aptitude for tumbling it is
through bodily infirmity, for I am worse on my feet than I used to be on
my head. It is four years since I jumped my last jump--filched my last
oyster--boiled my last sausage--and set in for retirement. Not quite so
well provided for, I must acknowledge, as in the days of my Clownship,
for then, I dare say, some of you remember, I used to have a fowl in one
pocket and sauce for it in the other.

"To-night has seen me assume the motley for a short time--it clung to my
skin as I took it off, and the old cap and bells rang mournfully as I
quitted them for ever.

"With the same respectful feelings as ever do I find myself in your
presence--in the presence of my last audience--this kindly assemblage so
happily contradicting the adage that a favourite has no friends. For the
benvolence that brought you hither--accept, ladies and gentlemen, my
warmest and most grateful thanks, and believe, that of one and all,
Joseph Grimaldi takes a double leave, with a farewell on his lips, and a
tear in his eyes.

"Farewell! That you and yours may ever enjoy that greatest earthly
good--health, is the sincere wish of your faithful and obliged servant.
God bless you all!"

Poor Joe was buried in the burying-ground of St. James' Chapel, on
Pentonville Hill, and in a grave next to his friend, Charles Dibdin. May
the earth lie lightly over him!




CHAPTER XVII.

Plots of the old form of Pantomimes--A description of "Harlequin and the
Ogress; or the Sleeping Beauty of the Wood," produced at Covent
Garden--Grimaldi, _Pere et Fils_--Tom Ellar, the Harlequin, and Barnes,
the Pantaloon--An account of the first production of the "House that
Jack built," at Covent Garden--Spectacular display--Antiquity and Origin
of some Pantomimic devices--Devoto, Angelo, and French, the Scenic
Artists--Transparencies--Beverley--Transformation Scenes.


Of the plots of the old form of Pantomime and what these entertainments
were generally like, graphically, does Planche describe them.

How different (he says) were the Christmas Pantomimes of my younger
days. A pretty story--a nursery tale--dramatically told, in which "the
course of true love never did run smooth," formed the opening; the
characters being a cross-grained old father, with a pretty daughter, who
had two suitors--one a poor young fellow, whom she preferred, the other
a wealthy fop, whose pretensions were, of course, favoured by the
father. There was also a body servant of some sort in the old man's
establishment. At the moment when the young lady was about to be
forcibly married to the fop she despised, or, on the point of eloping
with the youth of her choice, the good fairy made her appearance, and,
changing the refractory pair into Harlequin and Columbine, the old
curmudgeon into Pantaloon, and the body servant into Clown: the two
latter in company with the rejected "lover," as he was called, commenced
the pursuit of the happy pair, and the "comic business" consisted of a
dozen or more cleverly constructed scenes, in which all the tricks and
changes had a meaning, and were introduced as contrivances to favour the
escape of Harlequin and Columbine, when too closely followed by their
enemies. There was as regular a plot as might be found in a melodrama.
An interest in the chase which increased the admiration of the ingenuity
and the enjoyment of the fun of the tricks, by which the runaways
escaped capture, till the inevitable "dark scene" came, a cavern or a
forest, in which they were overtaken, seized, and the magic wand, which
had so uniformly aided them, snatched from the grasp of the despairing
Harlequin, and flourished in triumph by the Clown. Again at the critical
moment the protecting fairy appeared, and, exacting the consent of the
father to the marriage of the devoted couple, transported the whole
party to what was really a grand last scene, which everybody did wait
for. There was some congruity, some dramatic construction, in such
Pantomimes; and then the acting. For it was acting, and first-rate
acting.

To give the reader a further insight into the old form of Christmas
Pantomimes, I cull the following from "The Drama," a contemporary
magazine of the period (1822):--

In compliance with the long-established custom of gratifying the holiday
visitors of the theatres with Pantomimic representations at this season
of year, a new piece of that description was produced at this theatre
(Covent Garden) last night, December 26th, 1822, under the title of
"Harlequin and the Ogress; or the Sleeping Beauty of the Wood." The
introductory story is taken from the well-known tale of "The Sleeping
Beauty," in "Mother Bunch's Fairy Tales," which had before been
"melodramatised," but had not hitherto been taken for the groundwork of
a Harlequinade.

The piece opens in one of the fabled grand caverns under the Pyramids of
Egypt, in which the three fatal sisters of Mother Bunch's Mythology are
seen spinning and winding a ball of golden thread, the fastening of
which to the wrist of the Sleeping Beauty is intended to add another
century to the duration of her life, and of the power which the Ogress,
or Fairy, has exercised over her, and her possessions, for the preceding
hundred years. The ball having been completed, with the due quantum of
magic incantation in such cases prescribed, is consigned to the care of
Grim Gribber, the porter of the castle, with directions to attach it to
the wrist of the lady in the chamber of sleep, whither he accordingly
proceeds for that purpose; but overcome by the soporific influences of
the atmosphere of that enchanted place, he falls into a deep sleep ere
his task is accomplished. The Prince Azoff, with his Squire Abnab,
straying from a hunting party into the enchanted cedar grove, encounters
the Fairy Blue-bell, protector of the Sleeping Beauty, who imparts to
the Prince the story of her enchantment, furnishes him with a magic
flower to protect him from the influence of the Ogress, and instructs
him in the means of releasing the Beauty at the expiration of the term
of her first enchanted sleep, which is then drawing to a close. In the
amazement which seizes the Prince on finding himself in the chamber of
sleep, at the splendour of everything around him, and the sight of the
Sleeping Beauty with her surrounding train of attendants, whose
faculties are all enchained in the same preternatural slumber, he lets
fall the magic flower, and becomes thereby subject to the power of the
Ogress, from which he is, however, rescued on the instant by the
protecting interference of the Fairy Blue-bell. But in punishment of his
neglect, he is condemned to wander for a time in search of happiness
with the now-awakened Beauty, pursued by the relentless Ogress and her
servant, Grim Gribber. The whole of the persons engaged in the scene now
undergo the prescriptive Pantomimic changes, and the ordinary succession
of Harlequinade adventures, tricks, and transformations ensue.

Our old favourites, the Grimaldis, father and son, Mr. Ellar as
Harlequin, and Mr. Barnes as Pantaloon, were hailed, on their
appearance, with the warmth of greeting to which their excellence in
their several parts fully entitles them, and displayed their wonted
drollery, gracefulness, and agility: and Miss Brissak, who, for the
first time, appeared as Columbine, acquitted herself with tolerable
credit, and was very well received.

The scenery in general was marked with that characteristic beauty and
highly-finished excellence, which have long distinguished the
productions of this theatre: and the panoramic series of views of the
River Thames, from Greenwich to the Nore, on the passage of the Royal
flotilla for Scotland, and its arrival in Leith Roads, probably surpass
everything of the kind before exhibited. There are several diverting
tricks and ingenious changes. Grimaldi's equipment of a patent safety
coach at Brighton, in particular was highly amusing. The machinery,
which is, in many instances, of a most complicated description, worked
remarkably well for a first night's exhibition; and the whole went off
with a degree of _eclat_, which must have been exceedingly gratifying to
the managers, as auguring the probability of such a lengthened run for
the piece as may amply recompense the pains and expense which have been
so lavishly bestowed in its preparation. The house was filled in every
part, and the announcement of the Pantomime's repetition was received
with the most clamorous approbation, undisturbed by a single dissentient
voice.

The first production of "The House that Jack Built," at Covent Garden,
on December 26, 1824, also reads interestingly:--

The Pantomime is before us, and we should ill-repay the pleasure it
afforded us, if we did not acknowledge and make public its excellence.
The name implies the source from which it is taken, and we had,
therefore, the supreme pleasure of renewing our friendship with those
very old acquaintances, the "Priest all shaven and shorn, the maiden all
forlorn, the cow with the crumpled horn, the dog that worried the cat,
that killed the rat, that eat up the malt, that lay in the House that
Jack built." This, of course, gave us, as it appeared to do many others,
great pleasure, "For should auld acquaintance be forgot, and never
brought to mind." Mr. Farley, however, who supports (like an Atlas) all
the weight of bringing forward these annual pieces of fun and foolery,
and who appears to be as learned in the mystic lore of "hoary
antiquity," as he is in the mysteries of all the wonders of the tricks,
changes, and mechanism of the Pantomimic world, has let us this time
into a secret, which will doubtless cause much erudite argument, and
pros and cons from various sage antiquarians for months to come, in that
invaluable work of old Sylvanus Urban, 'yclept the "Gentlemen's
Magazine." As the play-bills on which this important piece of
information is to be found, will doubtless be bought up by all the
mystogogii of the Metropolis, and shortly become scarce, we shall take
the liberty of inserting it in our imperishable pages, for the benefit,
not only of posterity, but for those of our own day, who are infected
with the building mania, and who, we think, ought to make Mr. Farley
some very valuable present to mark their sense of the obligation they
are under to him, in consequence of the benefit which must accrue to
them from it. It appears from this fragment in what manner Jack became
possessed of his house, and which it never before occurred to us, to
enquire. Thus then the mystery is elucidated by Mr. Farley.

Jack's Wager;

"By virtue of one of our forest charters, if a man do build a dwelling
upon common land, from sun-set to sun-rise, and enclose a piece of
ground, wherein there shall be a tree growing, a beast feeding, a fire
kindled, and provision in the pot, such dwelling shall be freely held by
the builder, anything to the contrary, nevertheless, notwithstanding."
Forest Laws.

Accordingly Jack, in the opening scene, is represented just before
nightfall, as completing his dwelling, by putting on the chimney pot as
the finishing stroke; he then claims his bride, Rosebud, from her
father, Gaffer Gandy, who refuses his consent, having determined on
bestowing her hand on one Squire Sap. Jack, in despair, repairs to Poor
Robin, the village astrologer, who is intently observing an eclipse of
the moon (which, by-the-bye, is most excellently managed), and relates
his griefs. The old man cheers his drooping spirits, by casting his
nativity and finding by his observations, that Jack's stars are of the
most benign influence, and that all his wishes shall be fulfilled. The
marriage of the maiden all forlorn with the Squire is on the point of
being completed, when Venus (one of whose doves had been preserved by
Jack) dispatches Cupid to the assistance of the despairing lovers, by
the magic of whose powerful wand the usual Pantomimic changes are
effected in a trice--Jack becomes Harlequin; Rosebud, Columbine;
Gaffer, Pantaloon; the Squire, the Lover; and the Priest, the Clown.
Mirth, revelry, fun, frolic, and joviality are now the order of the day,
and the scene changes to a view of Hyde Park and the Serpentine River on
a frosty morning in January: in which is represented, with admirable
effect, a display of patent skating. An oil cloth is spread upon the
stage, a group comprised of various laughable characters are assembled
on it, and skate about with as much rapidity, and precisely as though it
were a sheet of ice. The adroit skill of old stagers on the slippery
surface, with the clumsy awkwardness and terror of novices in the art,
are well represented. A prodigious fat man makes his appearance; when a
race is called for, he, of course, tries his prowess, when the ice
cracking beneath the heavy weight assembled on it gives way with a heavy
crash, and "Fatty" is consigned to a watery bed. Assistance is
immediately tendered, when, by Harlequin's power, a lean and shrivelled
spirit of the deep rises from below to the great alarm of the beholders,
and whose limbs continue to expand till his head touches the clouds. The
whole of the scene is one of the most laughable and best managed in the
Pantomime. Kew Gardens, on a May-day morning, is also a very pleasing
scene, in which some pretty Morris dancing is introduced. The Barber's
shop, in which shaving by steam is hit off, is excellent in its way, but
not so well understood in its details, as to make it equally effective
in representation. Vauxhall Bridge, and the Gardens which succeeds it,
are also charmingly painted by the Grieves, and from hence the Clown
and Pantaloon take an "Aeronautic excursion" to Paris. This is a
revolving scene--the balloon ascends--and the English landscape
gradually recedes from the view--the gradual approach of night--the
rising of the moon--the passing of the balloon through heavy clouds--and
the return of day, are beautifully represented; the sea covered with
ships, is seen in distant perspective with the French coast; a
bird's-eye view of Paris follows, and the balloon safely descends in the
gardens of the Tuileries. The adjoining palace, mansions, and gardens
being brilliantly illuminated, give the scene a most splendid and
picturesque effect. A variety of other scenes, but far too numerous to
mention individually, deserve the highest applause, particularly the
village of Bow, Leadenhall Market, with a change to an illuminated civic
feast in the Guildhall; Burlington Arcade at night, and the village of
Ganderclue by sunrise. The Temple of Iris, formed of the "radiant
panoply of the heavenly arch," by Grieve, is most brilliant.

The advent of Pantomime, early in the eighteenth century, gave a special
fillip to spectacular display, as they were all announced to be set off
with "new scenery, decorations, and flyings."

Some of the stage devices of Pantomime are of considerable antiquity;
as, for instance, the basket-work hobby-horses, that figured as far back
as the old English Morris dances, to be revived in the French ballet of
the seventeenth century, and, in after years, in English Pantomime.

The Pantomime donkey is at least, we are told, 200 years old. In
"_Arlequin Mercure Galant_," produced in Paris in 1682, by the Italian
Comedians, Harlequin made his entrance on a moke's back--and the
merriment afterwards being greatly enhanced when Master "Neddy," with
Pan seated on its back, suddenly came in two, to the consternation of
the beholders. To the Italian Pantomime Comedians we owe many of our
stage devices and tricks. The statue scene in "Frivolity," played by the
Messrs. Leopolds, was introduced by the Italians in "_Arlequin Lingere
du Palais_," when this piece was performed at Paris in 1682. Again, the
device of cutting a hole in a portrait for an eaves-dropper's head to be
inserted, was used in "_Columbine Avocat_" as far back as 1685.

In "_Arlequin Lingere du Palais_," played at the Hotel de Bourgogne in
October, 1682, there was represented two stalls--an underclothier's and
a confectioner's. Harlequin dressed half like a man and half like a
woman, with a mask on each side of his face to match presides in this
dual capacity at both stalls. Pasquariel, who comes to buy, is utterly
bewildered, and is made the target of both jests and missiles of
monsieur of the confectioners, and mademoiselle of the adjoining stall.
Possibly the shop scenes in our English Harlequinades may have
originated from this. A similar idea to the above was given in O'Keefe's
Pantomime of "Harlequin Teague; or the Giants' Causeway," performed at
the Haymarket in 1782. Charles Bannister appeared in this Pantomime and
sang a duet as a giant with two heads, one side representing a gentleman
of quality, and the other a hunting squire. Mrs. German Reed, about
1855, appeared representing two old women, between whom an imaginary
conversation was held, Mrs. Reed turning first one side of her face to
the audience, and then the other. Fred Maccabe, in his "Essence of
Faust," had also a similar allusion, and by many "transformation
dancers" was it used. The antiquity of many other devices could be
noted, but I must desist, yet I cannot help remarking that even here we
have more exemplifications of history repeating itself.

Scenical representations and mechanical devices in Italy had long been
made a fine art, and an English traveller and critic observes that our
painting compared to theirs is only daubing. I find among their
decorations statues of marble, alabaster, palaces, colonnades,
galleries, and sketches of architecture; pieces of perspective that
deceive the judgment as well as the eye; prospects of a prodigious
extent in spaces not thirty feet deep. As for their machines I can't
think it in the power of human wit to carry their inventions further. In
1697, I saw at Venice an elephant discovered on the stage, when, in an
instant, an army was seen in its place; the soldiers, having by the
disposition of their shields, given so true a representation of it as if
it had been a real elephant.

In Rome, at the Theatre Capranio, in 1698, there was a ghost of a woman
surrounded by guards. This phantom, extending her arms and unfolding her
clothes, was, with one motion, transformed into a perfect palace, with
its front, its wings, body, and courtyard. The guards, striking their
halberds on the stage, were immediately turned into so many waterworks,
cascades, and trees, that formed a charming garden before the palace. At
the same theatre, in the opera "_Nerone Infante_," the interior of hell
was shown. Here part of the stage opened, and discovered a scene
underneath, representing several caves, full of infernal spirits, that
flew about, discharging fire and smoke, on another side the river of
Lethe and Charon's boat. Upon this landing a prodigious monster
appeared, whose mouth opening to the great horror of the spectators,
covered the front wings of the remaining part of the stage. Within his
jaws was discovered a throne of fire, and a multitude of monstrous
snakes, on which Pluto sat. After this the great monster, expanding his
wings, began to move very slowly towards the audience. Under his body
appeared a great multitude of devils, who formed themselves into a
ballet, and plunged, one after the other, into the opening of the floor.
The great monster was in an instant transformed into an innumerable
multitude of broad white butterflies, which flew all into the pit, and
so low that some often touched the hats of several of the spectators,
and at last they disappeared. During this circumstance, which
sufficiently employed the eyes of the spectators, the stage was
refitted, and the scene changed into a beautiful garden, with which the
third act began.

The scene painter, Devoto, painted the scenery and decorations for the
Goodman's Fields Theatre, where, it is interesting to note, David
Garrick made his first _London_ appearance in 1741. His first appearance
on any stage had been made at Ipswich on Tuesday, 21st July, in the same
year, under the name of Lyddall. Garrick, during his time, introduced
many novelties in the way of scenery and transparencies, acting on the
suggestions of Signor Seivandoni, the scenic artist at the Opera-house,
and the fencing master, Dominico Angelo. These transparencies became the
talk of London, and it has been known for several plays to have been
written so as to introduce them. The first transparent scene is said to
have been the "Enchanted Wood," introduced in "Harlequin's Invasion," at
Drury Lane, the painter being one French, the scenic artist of the
theatre.

Beverley, the scene painter for Madame Vestris, half a century ago,
brought fairy, or Pantomime, scenes to great perfection. Leopold Wagner,
speaking of them, says:--"We have it upon the authority of Mr. Planche
that these were almost entirely due to the skilled efforts and successes
of Mr. William Beverley, who, in the nature of Extravaganza, so
impressed the public with his fine talents as an artist upon theatrical
canvas, that gorgeous scenes became quite the rage, and how, year after
year, Mr. Beverley's powers were taxed to the utmost to outdo his
former triumphs, and how the most costly materials and complicated
machinery were annually put into requisition until the managers began to
suffer."

Speaking of the production on the 26th December, 1849, of "The Island of
Jewels," Planche says, "The novel, and yet exceedingly simple, falling
of the leaves of a palm tree, which discovered six fairies, supporting a
coronet of jewels, produced such an effect as I scarcely remember having
witnessed on any similar occasion up to that period. The last scene
became the first in the estimation of the management. The most
complicated machinery, the most costly materials were annually put into
requisition, until their bacon was so buttered that it was impossible to
save it. Nothing was considered brilliant but the _last_ scene. Dutch
metal was in the ascendant. It was no longer even painting, it was
upholstery. Mrs. Charles Mathews herself informed me that she had paid
between L60 and L70 for gold tissue for the dresses of the
Supernumeraries alone." I wonder what Mrs. Mathews would say if she
could now visit this terrestrial sphere of ours?

All this love of spectacular display soon began to supersede the good
old-fashioned Christmas Pantomimes.

In his work, "Behind the Scenes," Mr. Fitzgerald very graphically
describes the Transformation scene of later days, and now becoming
nearly as obsolete as the Harlequinade. All will recall in some
elaborate transformation scene how quietly and gradually it is evoked.
First the gauzes lift slowly one behind the other--perhaps the most
pleasing of all scenic effects--giving glimpses of the Realms of Bliss
seen beyond in a tantalising fashion. Then is revealed a kind of half
glorified country, clouds and banks evidently concealing much. Always a
sort of pathetic, and, at the same time, exultant strain rises, and is
repeated as the changes go on; now we hear the faint tinkle--signal to
those aloft on the "bridges" to open more glories. Now some of the banks
begin to part slowly, showing realms of light with a few divine
beings--fairies--rising slowly here and there. More breaks beyond, and
more fairies rising with a pyramid of these ladies beginning to mount
slowly in the centre. Thus it goes on, the lights streaming on full in
every colour and from every quarter in the richest effulgence. In some
of the more daring efforts the _femmes suspendues_ seem to float in the
air or rest on the frail support of sprays or branches of trees. While,
finally, at the back of all the most glorious paradise of all will open,
revealing the pure empyrean itself, and some fair spirit aloft in a
cloud among the stars; the apex of all. Then all motion ceases; the work
is complete; the fumes of crimson, red, and blue fire begin to rise at
the wings; the music bursts into a crash of exultation; and, possibly to
the general disenchantment, a burly man, in a black frock coat, steps
out from the side and bows awkwardly. Then, to a shrill whistle, the
first scene of the Harlequinade closes in, and shuts out the brilliant
vision.




CHAPTER XVIII.

Pantomimic Families--Giuseppe Grimaldi--James Byrne, the Harlequin and
Inventor of the modern Harlequin's dress--Joseph Grimaldi, Junior--The
Bologna Family--Tom Ellar--The Ridgways--The Bradburys--The
Montgomerys---The Paynes--The Marshalls--Charles and Richard
Stilt--Richard Flexmore--Tom Gray--The Paulos--Dubois--Arthur and
Charles Leclerq--"Jimmy" Barnes--Famous Pantaloons--Miss Farren--Mrs.
Siddons--Columbines--Notable Actors in Pantomime.


In the histrionic profession the genius of hereditary is shown over and
over again; and no more so than in Pantomimic families. For, if blessed
with a numerous progeny, the sons became--the eldest, of course, could
only, as the place of honour, be Clown--the others, Harlequins,
Pantaloons; the daughters, Columbines; and, perhaps, Harlequinas.

In the last chapter but one I have referred to Grimaldi's father,
Giuseppe Grimaldi, "Iron Legs," and now let us recall something more of
the sire of so worthy a son.

As a dancer--as his father was before him--and Pantomimist, Giuseppe
Grimaldi, before coming to England, had appeared at the fairs of France
and Italy. In 1758 Giuseppe made his first appearance on the stage of
Drury Lane, under Garrick's management, in a new Pantomime dance,
entitled, "The Millers."

For some thirty years afterwards the Signor continued to be a member of
the Drury Lane _corps de ballet_, and appearing as Clown, Harlequin, and
Pantaloon.

In 1764, Giuseppe played Harlequin in a Clown-less Pantomime at Sadler's
Wells, and in the Drury Lane Pantomime of the same year, though there
were Harlequin, Pantaloon, and Columbine in it, there was no Clown.
Drury Lane was then only open in the winter, and Sadler's Wells in the
summer months.

A notable Harlequin was Mr. James Byrne, the ballet-master. "Mr. Byrne,"
says Grimaldi, in his "Memoirs," "was the best Harlequin on the boards,
and never has been excelled, or even equalled, since that period."

Mr. Byrne came of a well-known dancing family, and to him we owe the
introduction of the tight-fitting dress worn by Harlequin. Until the
production of the Pantomime of "Harlequin Amulet, or the Magic of Mona,"
at Drury Lane Theatre, written by Mr. Powell, produced at Christmas,
1799, by Mr. Byrne, and which ran until Easter, 1800--it had been the
loose jacket and trousers of the ancient Mimes. It had also been
considered indispensable that Harlequin should be continually
attitudinising in the five different positions of Admiration,
Flirtation, Thought, Defiance, and Determination; and continually
passing from one to the other without pausing. Byrne, for newer
attitudes, abolished these postures, but long afterwards the old form of
posing was, and is still, retained by the exponents of Harlequin.

In this Pantomime, Byrne, as Harlequin, appeared in a white silk
close-fitting shape, fitting without a wrinkle, and into which the
variegated colours of time-honoured memory were woven, and covered with
spangles, presenting a very bright appearance.

Mr. Byrne, also gave the character of Harlequin an entirely new reading.
The colours of Harlequin's dress had every one a significance, as
follows:--Red, temper; blue, love; yellow, jealousy; brown or mauve,
constancy. When Harlequin wore his mask down he was supposed to be
invisible. On his mask he had two bumps, denoting knowledge on the one
hand, and thought on the other, whilst in his cap he wore a hare's foot,
and a worked device on his shoes, indicating flight and speed. Can we
not from the bumps of knowledge and the hare's foot trace the
characteristics of the god Mercury, which, as previously stated, was the
prototype of Harlequin. With the bat, or magic sword, the gift from the
fairies to him, Harlequin was supposed to be invulnerable, and if he
lost his sword he would fall into the power of the Clown.

Byrne's innovation was not resisted, and it was well received, and ever
since this memorable occasion, the character of Harlequin has, for the
most part, been dressed as Byrne dressed it. The significance of the
present-day variegated colours of Harlequin's costume are somewhat
different to the above, and denote: red, fire; blue, water; yellow, air;
and black, earth. These--the four elements--are typical of the regions
governed by Mercury.

Mr. Byrne was at Drury Lane in the time of Garrick. He died December
4th, 1845, in the eighty-ninth year of his age. Mrs. Byrne, who was also
a dancer, pre-deceasing her husband by a few months in her
seventy-fourth year.

Joseph Grimaldi, son of "Old Joe," made, at twelve years of age, his
first appearance at Sadler's Wells in 1814, playing Man Friday to his
father's Robinson Crusoe. For several years both father and son played
together in various Pantomimes; and it was thought that before young Joe
there was a brilliant future. This, however, was soon dissipated, as he
embarked upon vicious courses, and through a blow on the head received
in some brawl "He became a wild and furious savage; he was frequently
attacked with dreadful fits of epilepsy, and continually committed
actions which nothing but insanity could prompt. In 1828 he had a
decided attack of insanity, and was confined in a strait waistcoat in
his father's house for some time."

From engagements at Drury Lane, Sadler's Wells, the Pavilion and the
Surrey Theatre in turn, he was dismissed, finally "Falling into the
lowest state of wretchedness and poverty. His dress had fallen to rags,
his feet were thrust into two worn-out slippers, his face was pale with
disease, and squalid with dirt and want, and he was steeped in
degradation." This unhappy life came to a final close in a public-house
in Pitt Street, off the Tottenham Court Road.

Signor Pietro Bologna, a country-man and friend of Giuseppe Grimaldi,
Joe Grimaldi's father, brought with him from Genoa his wife, two sons
and a daughter. They were all Mimes, and, in a Pantomime produced in
1795, entitled, "The Magic Feast," Signor Bologna was Clown, and his
son, "Jack" Bologna, was Harlequin; the latter being also Harlequin to
Grimaldi's Clown, both at Covent Garden and Sadler's Wells. "Jack"
Bologna married a sister of Mary Bristow, Joe Grimaldi's second wife,
and the mother of poor young Joe.

Tom Ellar was another famous Harlequin, first making his appearance at
the Royalty, Goodman's Fields, in 1808. For several seasons he played
Harlequin at Covent Garden.

Many years ago penny portraits of Mr. Ellar "In his favourite character
of Harlequin," were published by a Mr. Skelt, or a Mr. Park, of Long
Lane, Smithfield, and were the delight of those, who, if living now, are
old and gray.

Tom Ellar died April 8, 1842, aged 62. Previous to his death he must
have fallen upon evil days, as Thackeray, in 1840, wrote: "Tom, who
comes bounding home from school, has the doctor's account in his trunk,
and his father goes to sleep at the Pantomime to which he takes him.
_Pater infelix_, you too, have laughed at Clown, and the magic wand of
spangled Harlequin: what delightful enchantment did it wave round you in
the golden days 'when George the Third was King?' But our Clown lies in
his grave; and our Harlequin Ellar, prince of many of our enchanted
islands, was he not at Bow Street the other day, in his dirty, faded,
tattered motley--seized as a law breaker for acting at a penny theatre,
after having well nigh starved in the streets, where nobody would listen
to his old guitar? No one gave a shilling to bless him: not one of us
who owe him so much!"

Another Pantomime family were the Ridgways. Tom Ridgway was Clown under
Madame Vestris's management at Covent Garden.

There have been several Bradburys since the time of Grimaldi's great
rival, Robert Bradbury, died July 21, 1831, who wore on his person nine
strong "pads," in order to go through some extraordinary feats.

The Montgomerys; the Paynes, Harry and Fred; nor should the name of "Old
Billy" Payne be omitted. "Billy" Payne it was, it will be remembered,
who, in 1833, helped, from the stage of Covent Garden, the dying Edmund
Kean.

Then there were the Marshalls, Harry and Joseph; Charles and Richard
Stilt; and a very original and amusing Clown, Richard Flexmore, died
August 20, 1860, aged 36. Tom Gray, a famous Clown of Covent Garden,
died January 28th, 1768, aged upwards of 100 years; the Paulo family of
Pantomimists; Dubois, Arthur and Charles Leclerq, Walter Hilyard, and
many, many others.

In the 'twenties and 'thirties a popular and famous Pantaloon was
"Jimmy" Barnes, died September 28th, 1838. Barnes, in the summer of
1830, was engaged to play in an English company at Paris, but they had
hardly commenced to perform when the Revolution of July broke out. Some
years afterwards Barnes published in "Bentley's Miscellany," from his
old original M.S., an amusing and illustrated account of his wanderings.

Amongst other Pantaloons there have been--Thomas Blanchard, died August
20, 1859, aged 72; William Lynch, died June 29, 1861, aged 78; R.
Norman, died September 16, 1858, aged 70; George Tanner, died February
8, 1870; and Paulo, a member of Mr. Charles Kean's Company at the
Princess's Theatre, had as Pantaloon appeared in many Pantomimes. It is
a notable fact that a good number of our Mimes were long-livers.

Long before Miss Farren, afterwards Countess of Derby (died April 21,
1829), first charmed a London audience, we hear of her in 1772 at
Wakefield in one of her first parts--if not her first--that of
Columbine. She could both sing well and dance gracefully. One of the
earliest "parts" that even the great Mrs. Siddons (that afterwards was),
when a young girl, played, was in connection with Pantomime, as Combes
remembered to have seen her "Standing by the side of her father's stage,
and knocking a pair of snuffers against a candle-stick to imitate the
sound of a wind-mill, during the representation of some Harlequinade."

In days gone by Madame Leclerq, Carlotta Leclerq, Charles Kean's
Columbine in the seasons of 1850-1-2, E. Dennett, Emma Boleno, died
October 18th, 1867, aged 35; Marie Charles, who died from an accident by
fire, Pavilion Theatre, January 21, 1864, and others have won
considerable fame in the part of Columbine.

Amongst those who have played Harlequin in days gone by, have been the
elder Kean, and the well-known actor, Mr. Wilson Barrett, who, early in
his career, played this part for an extra two shillings and sixpence
"thrown in," to augment his then weekly salary of seventeen shillings
and sixpence; whilst Sir Henry Irving tells us that he also has appeared
in Pantomime, in the character of a wicked fairy, named Venoma, in days
since past, for a small monetary emolument.




CHAPTER XIX.

Popular Pantomime subjects--Poor Pantomime Librettos--Pantomime subjects
of our progenitors--The various versions of "Aladdin"--"The Babes in the
Wood"--"Blue Beard"--"Beauty and the Beast"--"Cinderella"--"Dick
Whittington"--"The House that Jack Built"--"Jack the Giant
Killer"--"Jack and the Beanstalk"--"Red Riding Hood"--"The Sleeping
Beauty in the Wood"--Unlucky subjects--"Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves"--"The Fair One with Golden Locks"--The source of "Sindbad the
Sailor" and "Robinson Crusoe."


It may be of interest in this History of Pantomime to note the origin of
some of our most popular present day Pantomime subjects, besides showing
many of our present day Pantomime libretto writers that in such
well-known themes as "Aladdin," "Cinderella," and others, there is no
need to cast their stories pretty much in the same groove, year after
year, when by drawing on the fairy-lore of the East much that is new and
original, for present-day English Pantomimes, is waiting the attention
of their skill and ingenuity.

Though the stories of popular English Pantomimes are practically the
same each year (why I do not know), yet, not content with this, in many
of our large cities and towns we frequently see the same Pantomime title
not only "billed" at one theatre, but perhaps at several others. This
clashing and clashing year after year with one another's titles (I say
nothing about the "plots," as these, in many instances, only consist of
a half-penny worth of author to an intolerable deal of music-hall gag),
cannot but, I have long been of opinion, adversely affect the box-office
receipts, unless, of course, the Pantomime-goer makes a point of "doing
the round," so to speak, which, however, is not generally the case.

As Pantomime writers in the early days there were Thomas Dibdin, son of
Charles Dibdin, the writer of nautical ballads, Pocock and Sheridan.
Dibdin was one of the best of Pantomime librettists, and from the years
1771 to 1841 his prolific pen, as a writer of Pantomimes, was never
idle, as from it came some thirty-three Pantomimes, and all successes.
Amongst other literary luminaries, in after years, as writers of
Pantomime Extravaganzas, there were J.R. Planche, E.L. Blanchard, W.
Brough, Mark Lemon, H.J. Byron, Wilton Jones, and John Francis McArdle.

History always repeats itself we know, and poor Pantomime books were not
unknown as far back as half a century ago, as the subjoined parody on
the "Burial of Sir John Moore," by the late Albert Smith plainly
shows:--

    Not a laugh was heard, not a topical joke,
      As its corse to oblivion we hurried;
    Not a paper a word in its favour spoke
      On the Pantomime going to be buried.

    We buried it after the Boxing Night,
      The folks from the galleries turning;
    For 'twas plain it would scarcely pay for the light
      Of the star in the last act burning.

    No useless play-bill put forth a puff,
      How splendid the public had found it,
    But it lay like a piece that had been called "stuff,"
      With a very wet blanket around it.

After this digression for one brief moment more, let us take a passing
glance at some of the Pantomime subjects which our progenitors delighted
in. They had not the continual ringing of the changes on half-a-dozen
Pantomime subjects, as we have at present, but revelled in such
attractions as "Harlequin Don Quixote," "The Triumph of Mirth, or
Harlequin's Wedding," "The Enchanted Wood or Harlequin's Vagaries,"
"Hurly Burly, or the Fairy of the Wells," "Blue Beard, Black Beard, and
Grey Beard," and many others. However, to return.

Of the Pantomime subjects, whose origin we are going to enquire into,
let us first commence with "Aladdin."

According to the many versions of this popular story in Europe and Asia,
it would seem that its origin originally was of Buddhist extraction. In
our common English version of "Aladdin," in "The Arabian Nights," which
was taken from Galland's French version, it is doubtless an Eastern
picture. It does not occur, however, in any known Arabian text (says
Mr. Clouston, in "Popular Tales," and to whose work I am indebted for
much of the information for this chapter) of "The Thousand and One
Nights" (_Elf Laila wa Laila_), although the chief incidents are found
in many Asiatic fictions, and it had become orally current in Greece and
Italy before it was published by Galland. A popular Italian version,
which presents a close analogy to the familiar story of "Aladdin"
(properly "_Ala-u-d-Din_," signifying "Exaltation of the Faith") is
given by Miss M.H. Busk, in her "Folklore of Rome," under the title of
"How Cajusse was married."

A good natured looking old man one day knocks at the door of a poor
tailor out of work; his son, opening the door, is told by the old man
that he is his uncle, and he gives him half a piastre to buy a good
dinner. When the tailor comes home--he was absent at the time--he is
surprised to hear the old man claim him as a brother, but finding him so
rich he does not dispute the matter. After the old man had lived some
time with the tailor and his family, literally defraying all the
household expenses, he finds it necessary to depart, and with the
tailor's consent takes the boy Cajusse with him, in order that he may
learn some useful business. But no sooner do they get outside the town
than he tells Cajusse that it is all a dodge. "I'm not your uncle," he
says, "I want a strong, daring boy to do something I am too old to do.
I'm a wizard--don't attempt to escape for you can't." Cajusse, not a bit
frightened, asks him what it is he wants him to do; and the wizard
raises a flat stone from the ground, and orders him to go down, and
after he gets to the bottom of the cave to proceed until he comes to a
beautiful garden, where he will see a fierce dog keeping watch. "Here's
bread for him. Don't look back when you hear sounds behind you. On a
shelf you will see an old lantern; take it down, and bring it to me." So
saying the wizard gave Cajusse a ring, in case anything awkward should
happen to him after he had got the lantern, when he had only to rub the
ring, and wish for deliverance. Cajusse finds precious stones hanging
like frost from the trees in the garden underground, and he fills his
pocket with them. Returning to the entrance of the cave, he refuses to
give up the lantern till he has been drawn out; so the wizard thinking
merely to frighten him replaces the stone. Cajusse finding himself thus
entrapped rubs the ring, when instantly the Slave of the Ring appears,
and the youth at once orders the table to be laid for dinner. He then
calls for his mother and father, and they all have an unusually good
meal. Some time afterwards, Cajusse had returned home, the town was
illuminated, one day in honour of the marriage of the Sultan's daughter
to the Vizier's son. He sends his mother to the palace with a basket of
jewels, and, to demand the Sultan's daughter in marriage. The Sultan is
astounded at the purity of the gems, and says he will give his answer in
a month. At the end of the same week the Grand Vizier's son is married
to the Princess. Cajusse rubs his lantern and says "Go to-night and take
the daughter of the Sultan and lay her on a poor pallet in our
outhouse." This is done, and Cajusse begins to talk to her, but she is
far too frightened to answer. The Sultan learns of his daughter's
whereabouts, and does not know what to make of the strange business. The
son of the Vizier complains to his father that his wife disappears every
night, and comes back just before dawn. Cajusse now sends his mother to
the Sultan with three more baskets full of jewels, and the Sultan tells
her he may come and see him at the palace. Having received this message,
Cajusse rubs the lantern, gets a dress of gold and silver, a richly
caparisoned horse, four pages with rich dresses to ride behind them, and
one to go before, distributing money to the people. Cajusse is next
married to the Princess, and they live together in a most magnificent
palace with great happiness. By-and-bye the old wizard hears of this,
and resolves to obtain the lantern by hook or by crook. Disguising
himself as a pedlar he comes to the palace calling out the familiar "New
lamps for old." By this means he obtains the precious lamp, and
immediately transports the palace and the princess to an island in the
high seas. Cajusse, by the aid of the magic ring, quickly follows, to
find his princess a prisoner in the power of the wizard. He then gives
her this advice: "Make a feast to-night; say you'll marry the old wizard
if he'll tell you what thing would be fatal to him, and you will guard
him against it." The princess gets from the magician the fatal secret.
"One must go into a far distant forest," he says "Where there is a beast
called the hydra, and cut off his seven heads. If the middle head is
split open a leveret will jump out and run off. If the leveret is split
open, a bird will fly out. If the bird is caught and opened, in its body
is a precious stone, and should that be placed under my pillow I shall
die." Cajusse accomplishes all these things, and gives the life-stone to
the princess, together with a bottle of opium. The princess drugs the
wizard's wine, and when he had laid his head on his pillow (under which
was the stone) he gave three terrible yells, turned himself round three
times, and was dead. After thus ridding themselves of their enemy,
Cajusse and his bride lived happy ever afterwards.

Aladdin's adventure with the magician in the enchanted cave has also its
counterpart in Germany (see Grimms' German Collection).

Another "Aladdin" version is the tale of Maruf, the last in the Bulak
and Calcutta printed Arabic texts of the "Book of Maruf" in "The
Thousand and One Nights." The story is to the effect that Maruf had
given out that he was a rich man, under which false pretence he marries
the Sultan's daughter. The tale he spread about was that he was
expecting the arrival of a rich caravan, which contained all his
princely wealth. After they were married, Maruf confesses to his wife
the imposture he has practised on them. She urges him to fly, or his
head would be forfeited, and procures him a disguise to flee the
country. He does so, and, whilst journeying through a village, he sees a
man ploughing in a field, whom he asks for food. Whilst the latter is
away, Maruf continues the ploughing, where the man had left off, and
the ploughshare strikes against something hard in the ground, which
turns out to be an iron ring in a marble slab. He pulls at the ring, and
Maruf discovers a small room covered with gold, emeralds, rubies, and
other precious stones. He also discovers a coffer of crystal, having a
little box, containing a diamond in its entirety. Desirous of knowing
what the box further contains, he finds a plain gold ring, with strange
talismanic characters engraved thereon. Placing the ring on his finger,
he is suddenly confronted by the Genii of the Ring, who demands to know
what are his commands. Maruf desires the Genii to transport all the
treasure to the earth, when mules and servants appear, and carry it to
the city which Maruf had left, much to the chagrin of the Vizier, who
did not like Maruf. Maruf, during a great feast prepared for the
occasion, tells the Sultan how he became possessed of the treasure, when
the Sultan begs the loan of the ring, which Maruf hands to the Vizier to
give him, and which no sooner does he get, than he commands the Genii to
convey Maruf to some desert island, and leave him to die. The Vizier
also serves the Sultan the same way, and then he turns his attention to
"Mrs. Maruf," whom he threatens with death if she refuses to marry him.
At a banquet she makes the Vizier drunk, obtains possession of the ring,
secures the return of Maruf and the Sultan, and the decapitation of the
Vizier.

The "Babes in the Wood" was registered on the books of Stationers' Hall
as a ballad as far back as 1595.

To take another familiar Pantomime subject, "Blue Beard," this story is
said to have been invented as a satire on our King Henry VIII. There is
little doubt, however, of it originating from a very ancient source; and
to afford the reader all the possible information on the subject, a
writer in "The Drama," a magazine of the beginning of the last century
has the following, though he does not state his authority for the
information:--

As this extraordinary personage has long been the theme, not only of
children's early study and terror, it will be gratifying to peruse the
character of that being who really existed, and who was distinguished in
horror and derision by the strange appellation of "Blue Beard."

He was the famous Gilles, Marquis de Laval, a Mareschal of France, and a
General of uncommon intrepidity, who greatly distinguished himself in
the reigns of Charles VI. and VII., by his courage, particularly against
the English, when they invaded France. He rendered such services to his
country, which were sufficient to immortalize his name, had he not for
ever tarnished his glory by the most terrible and cruel murders,
blasphemies, and licentiousness of every kind. His revenues were
princely; but his prodigality was sufficient to render even an Emperor a
bankrupt. Wherever he went he had in his suite a seraglio, a band of
players, a company of musicians, a society of sorcerers and magicians,
an almost incredible number of cooks, packs of dogs of various kinds,
and above 200 led horses. Mezerai, an author of great repute, says,
that he encouraged and maintained men who called themselves sorcerers,
to discover hidden treasures, and corrupted young persons of both sexes
to attach themselves to him, and afterwards killed them for the sake of
their blood, which was requisite to form his charms and incantations.
These horrid excesses may be believed, when we reflect on the age of
ignorance and barbarism in which they were certainly too often
practised. He was at length, for a state crime against the Duke of
Brittany, sentenced to be burnt alive in a field at Nantz in 1440, but
the Duke, who was present at his execution, so far mitigated the
sentence, that he was first strangled, then burnt, and his ashes buried.
Though he was descended from one of the most illustrious families in
France, he declared, previous to his death, that all his terrible
excesses were owing to his wretched education.

"Blue Beard" was first dramatised at Paris, in 1746, when "_Barbe Bleu_"
was thus announced:--_Pantomime_--_representee par la troupe des
Comediens Pantomimes, Foir St. Laurent_. It was afterwards dramatised at
the Earl of Barrymore's Theatre, Wargrave, Berks., and in 1791. After
that the subject was produced at Covent Garden Theatre as a Pantomime.

"Beauty and the Beast," the latter a white bear, is to be found in
"Popular Tales from the Norse," by Mr. Dasent, and in the collection of
"Popular Tales from the German" by the Brothers Grimm. As a ballad the
story of "Beauty and the Beast" is a very old one.

"Cinderella" is to be found in the language of every European country.
In ancient Hindu legends it appears; in tales related by the Greek poets
it is also to be found.

The story of "Cinderella," according to the ancient Hindu legends, is
that of the Sun and the Dawn. Cinderella has been likened to Aurora, the
Spirit of the Dawn, and the fairy Prince of the legend is the morning
Sun, ever closely pursuing her to make her his bride. The Hindu legend
of the lost slipper is that a wealthy Rajah's beautiful daughter was
born with a golden necklace, which contained her soul, and, if the
necklace was taken off and worn by someone else, the Princess would die.
The Rajah gave her on her birthday a pair of slippers with ornaments of
gold and gems upon them. The princess went out upon a mountain to gather
flowers, and whilst stooping there to pluck the flowers, one of her
slippers fell into the forest below. A Prince, who was hunting, picked
up the slipper, and was so charmed with it that he said he would make
the wearer his wife. He made his wish known, but no one came to claim
the slipper; at length word was given to the Prince where to find the
Rajah's daughter; and shortly afterwards they were married. One of the
wives of the Prince, being jealous of the Rajah's daughter, stole the
necklace, put it on her own neck, and then the Rajah's daughter died.
The Prince, afterwards, found out the secret of the necklace, and got it
back again, and put it on his dead wife's neck, and she came to life,
and they lived ever afterwards in the greatest harmony.

The ancient Grecian version of "Cinderella" is that of the story of a
beautiful woman named Rhodope, who, whilst bathing, an eagle flew away
with one of her slippers to Egypt, and dropped it in the lap of the King
as he sat at Memphis on the judgment seat. The King was so attracted by
the smallness and beauty of the slipper that he fell in love with the
wearer, and afterwards made her his wife.

In Tuscany, Persia, Norway, Denmark, Russia, the story of "Dick
Whittington" is well known. In all probability, like many other fairy
tales, its origin was from a Buddhist source. The English version, that
the Lord Mayor Whittington was the poor ill-used boy he is represented
to have been in the popular tale seems quite impossible, since according
to Stow (mentions Mr. Clouston) he was the son of Sir Richard
Whittington, Knight. The story was current in Europe in the thirteenth
century. In the chronicle of Albert, Abbot of the Convent of St. Mary of
Slade, written at that period, it is related that there were two
citizens of Venice, one of whom was rich, the other poor. It fortuned
that the rich man went abroad to trade, and the poor man gave him as his
venture two cats, the sale of which, as in our tale of the renowned
"Dick Whittington," procured him great wealth.

On September 21st, 1668, Pepys makes mention in his diary of going to
Southwark Fair, and of seeing the puppet show of "Whittington," which he
says "was pretty to see." A Pantomime on the subject was also given by
Rich early in the eighteenth century.

In Tuscany, the "Dick Whittington" story runs that in the fifteenth
century, a Genoese merchant, who presented two cats to the King, was
rewarded by him with rich presents.

In Norway, a poor boy, having found a box full of silver money under a
stone, emptied the box and its contents into a lake--one piece, however,
floated, which he kept, believing it to be _good_. His mother, hearing
of this, thrust him out of doors; and he eventually obtained employment
in a merchant's house. The merchant, having to make a voyage to foreign
parts, he asked each of his servants what he should "venture" for him.
The poor boy offered all he had, the silver penny, of which he was still
the possessor. With this the merchant purchased a cat, and sailed away,
but the vessel in which he was in was driven out of her course on to the
shores of a strange country. The merchant going ashore went to an inn,
and, in a room, he saw the table laid for dinner, with a long rod for
each man who sat at it. When the meat was set on the table, out swarmed
thousands of mice, and each one who sat at the table beat them off with
his rod. The cat was brought into service, and sold for a hundred
dollars, and soon put an end to the career of the mice. When the
merchant had weighed anchor, much to his surprise, he saw the cat
sitting at the mast head. Again foul weather came on, and again the
vessel was driven to another strange country, where the mice were just
as numerous as before. The cat was called in, sold this time for two
hundred dollars, and away the merchant sailed. No sooner, however, was
he at sea, than the cat once more appeared before him. The vessel was
again driven out of her course to another strange country, over-run with
rats this time, when poor pussy was sold a third time, for the sum of
three hundred dollars. Again the cat made its appearance; and the
merchant thinking to do the poor boy out of his money, a dreadful storm
arose, which only subsided on the merchant making a vow that the boy
should have every penny. When he arrived home the merchant faithfully
kept his promise, gave the boy the six hundred dollars, and the hand of
his daughter besides.

A Breton legend of the story of "Dick Whittington" runs that three sons
go to seek their fortune, the eldest of whom, Yvon, possesses a cat. The
cat again plays an important part. Yvon becomes the friend of the Lord
of the Manor, and has gold and diamonds bestowed upon him in galore.

The Russian version is that a poor little orphan boy buys a cat, which
some mischievous boys were teasing, for three copecks (about a penny).
Taken into the service of a merchant the latter goes to a distant
country, accompanied by the cat of the orphan boy. Puss making sad work
of some rats, which threatened to make an end of the merchant in the
inn, which he occupied. He ultimately sold the cat to the landlord for a
sack full of gold. Returning home, on his way thither, he thought how
foolish it would be to give all the money to the boy. Whereupon a
dreadful storm arose, and the vessel, in which was the merchant, was in
danger of sinking. The merchant, knowing that the storm had arisen
through his change of purpose, prayed to heaven for forgiveness, when
the sea became calm, and the vessel arrived safely in port, when the
merchant paid over to the orphan boy all the wealth obtained by the sale
of the cat.

In the Persian version, unlike the other legends, the cat is owned by a
poor widow, who had been impoverished through her sons, and was left
with only a cat. The sale of the cat produces great wealth; and the
widow, Kayser, immediately sends for her sons to share her
newly-acquired fortune. What follows is different to the other versions
of these wonderful cat stories. The sons only too eager to share the
wealth of their mother, fit out many vessels, and begin to trade largely
with India and Arabia. Thinking that to acquire wealth by commerce
alone, rather slow work, they turned pirates, and were a source of
trouble and annoyance to the neighbouring states, till about 1230 A.D.,
when they were reduced to vassalage under Persian rule.

"The House that Jack Built" has its prototype in a sacred hymn in the
Talmud of the Hebrews.

"Jack, the Giant Killer" and "Jack and the Beanstalk" are two very
ancient themes coming from the North, of the time, it is said, of King
Arthur, and of the days when "Giants were upon the earth." The
well-known cry of the giants in these legends--

    "Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum,
    I smell the blood of an Englishman;
    Be he alive or be he dead,
    I'll grind his bones to make my bread,"

is also referred to by Shakespeare in "King Lear," in Act III., Scene 5,
when Edgar sings:--

    "Child Rowland to the dark Tower came;
    His word was still, fee, foh, and fum,
    I smell the blood of an Englishman."

The English version of the story of "Jack the Giant Killer," must,
therefore, be older than the time of Elizabeth. It is also a strange and
significant fact that amongst the Zulus, and the inhabitants of the Fiji
Islands, there are similar legends of the story of "Jack and the
Beanstalk."

The story of "Jack and the Beanstalk" is also to be found in old Hindoo
tales, in which the beans denote abundance. The Russians have a story in
which a bean falls to the ground, and an old man, the Sun, climbs up by
it to heaven. "The ogre in the land above the skies," observes Mr.
Baring Gould, "who was once the all-father, possessed three treasures--a
harp, which played of itself enchanting music; bags of gold and
diamonds; and a hen which daily laid a golden egg. The harp is the
wind, the bags of gold are the clouds dropping the sparkling rain, and
the golden egg laid every day by the red hen is the producing sun." The
same idea in "Jack and the Beanstalk" occurs in the fairy legends of the
North and the East, as well as in Grecian stories.

In "Jack the Giant Killer," the gifts given to Jack are found in Tartar,
Hindoo, Scandinavian, and German legends.

Now let us note briefly the origin of "Red Riding Hood" and "The
Sleeping Beauty in the Wood." All the other fairy stories that we know
of are to be found in other countries, and springing originally from
Asia, where they were made ages and ages ago.

The Wolf in the story of "Red Riding Hood" has been likened to the days
of our own "Bluff King Hal," owing to the latter's suppression of the
monasteries, and Red Riding Hood herself, whom the Wolf subsequently
eats, with her hood and habit, was supposed to be typical of the
monastic orders.

The Hindoo's version of the "Red Riding Hood" story is a pretty and
fanciful one. Their idea was that there was always a great Dragon
endeavouring to devour Indra, the Sun god, and to prevent the Sun from
shining upon the earth, Indra ultimately overcomes the Dragon. Red
Riding Hood, with her warm habit, is supposed to be the setting sun
casting its red and glittering rays as it sinks to rest. The old
Grandmother is Mother Earth; and the Wolf, the Dragon; and when all is
dark and still, the Wolf swallows the Grandmother, namely, the Earth;
and afterwards, as Night has fallen, the Evening Sun. The Huntsman
denotes the Morning Sun, and he chases away all the dark clouds gathered
during the night, and by doing so kills the Wolf; recovers the old
Grandmother Earth, and brings to life again, Little Red Riding Hood.
Another version (observes Mr. T. Bunce) is that the Wolf is the dark,
and dreary winter, that kills the Earth with frost, but when spring
comes again it brings the Earth and the Sun back to life.

In "The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood," the maiden has been likened to the
Morning dawn, and the young Prince, who awakens her, with a kiss, to the
Sun.

"Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves," in concluding this chapter, I may say,
with "The Fair One with Golden Locks," forms to the superstitious the
only two unlucky Pantomime subjects.

"Sindbad, the Sailor," taken from the "Arabian Nights," has its origin
in Persian and Arabian tales.

Of all our Pantomime subjects, "Robinson Crusoe," seems to be the only
one we can properly lay claim to as being "of our own make," so to
speak, and written by Daniel De Foe, and, in the main, from the
imagination. De Foe, it has been stated, derived his idea for this
story from the adventures of one, Alexander Selkirk, a Scotchman, who
had been a castaway on the Island of Juan Fernandez. The first portion
of "Robinson Crusoe" appeared in "The Family Instructor," in 1719, of
which De Foe was the founder. It, at once, sprang into popularity, and
has left its author undying fame. De Foe was born about 1660 in the
parish of St. Giles, Cripplegate, died 26th April, 1731, and was buried
in Bunhill Fields.




CHAPTER XX.

Pantomime in America.


Pantomime, in America, had not a very long run, it being killed by the
farcical comedy. Mr. E.L. Blanchard supposes that "Mother Goose" was the
first Pantomime played in America, but this is an error, as it was not
until 1786, when Garrick's "Harlequin's Invasion," and R. Pocock's
"Robinson Crusoe" were played at the John Street Theatre, New York, that
Pantomime made its advent in America. "Mother Goose" was afterwards
played, but it did not suit the Yankee's taste. Rich's Harlequin, Gay of
"The Beggars Opera," produced at Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre, and which
it is said made "Rich Gay, and Gay Rich," also went to America, and
where, it is said, he became the Chief of an Indian tribe in the Far
West. In the South Sea Bubble Gay held some L20,000. His friends advised
him to sell, but he dreamed of greatness and splendour, and refused
their counsel. Ultimately, both the profit and the principal was lost,
and Gay sunk under the calamity so low that his life became in danger.

American Pantomimes consisted of a semi-pastoral "opening," performed
almost entirely in dumb show, and a big trick Harlequinade, and down to
the time of Pantomime's decease in America was it played like this.

George L. Fox made Pantomime highly popular in America. Born in May of
1825, he, as an actor and comedian in Yankee and Irish parts, held his
own in popularity with the great Joseph Jefferson.

Fox might be properly termed "The Grimaldi of America," as he was the
representative Clown of the land of the stars and stripes. His Clown's
parts he dressed like Grimaldi, and with the whitened face and bald head
of Pierrot, the French type of Clown.

The year that "Mother Goose" came to New York saw the introduction of a
French troupe of Pantomimists, known as the Ravels. In imitation of
these performers Fox introduced in the 'fifties ballet Pantomimes, and
several Ravelsque pieces like "The Red Gnome" and "The Schoolmaster"
with good results.

In 1862 Fox was at the Bowery Theatre, and, during his occupation of the
same, he did much to popularise Pantomime. Half a dozen years afterwards
we find him at the Olympic Theatre, New York, where he produced "Humpty
Dumpty," which ran 483 nights, and for five years, till 1873, it held
its place, on and off, in the bill. Altogether it was played 943 times.
Fox, from this, was known as Humpty Dumpty, and, strangely enough, also,
the Americans for long enough afterwards called every Pantomime "Humpty
Dumpty."

Fox was a very good mimic, imitating all the Hamlets of the day, besides
being a good melodramatic actor. He died October 24th, 1877, at
Cambridge, Mass., of softening of the brain.

Tony Denier, a pupil of the Ravels, and a quondam friend of Fox, next
took Fox's place in the estimation of the American public. Of Denier, we
are told that he arrived in Boston in 1852, with the proverbial
half-crown in his pocket. He was of French extraction, and descended
from one of the best French families. In 1863 he was with P.T. Barnum,
and appearing as a one-legged dancer. In 1868, he went into Pantomime,
toured "Humpty Dumpty," and for some twenty years afterwards kept the
Pantomimic ball merrily rolling until his retirement at Chicago into
private life. Denier made Harlequinade tricks a speciality.

Pantomime in America may be said to have lived about a quarter of a
century; but in the autumn of this year (1901) Pantomime, as we now know
it in this country, made its first appearance at the Broadway Theatre,
New York, when last year's Drury Lane annual, "The Sleeping Beauty and
the Beast," was successfully presented. It is very probable that this
class of entertainment will become very popular in America.




CHAPTER XXI.

Pantomimes made more attractive--The Restrictive Policy of the Patent
Houses--"Mother Goose" and "George Barnwell" at Covent Garden--Lively
Audiences--"Jane Shore"--"Harlequin Pat and Harlequin Bat"--"The first
speaking opening"--Extravagence in Extravaganzas--The doom of the old
form of Pantomime--Its revival in a new form--A piece of pure
Pantomime--Present day Mimetic Art--"_L'Enfant Prodigue_"--A
retrospect--The old with the new, and conclusion.


Pantomimes, as they grew, were made more and more attractive, "new
scenery, decorations, and flyings" were introduced, and with new
"flyings," of course, more accidents.

The restrictive policy adopted by the Patent theatres--till the repeal
of their patents (1843)--towards the minor houses, which gave to the
former the sole and only right of performing the "legitimate" was, by
the minor theatres, infringed in many ways. The means adopted was the
employment of Pantomime in the depiction of plays adapted and considered
suitable for the minor theatres. These were entirely carried on by
action, and when the actor could not express something that had to be
explained, like the names of characters, a scroll, with the necessary
details inscribed thereon, was unrolled in full view of the audience.
These entertainments were very popular at the close of the eighteenth
century, and they were also the means of providing some first-class
Pantomimists--as, for instance, Bologna and D'Egville.

In a couple of volumes by Mr. J.C. Cross, entitled, "Circusiana," the
author of many of these old "dumb shows," the reader can see what they
were like. The scripts of these plays consisted, like our ancient
"Platts" and the Italian Scenarios, of principally stage directions.

John Palmer, the actor who died on the stage of the Theatre Royal,
Liverpool--now used for the purpose of a cold storage--after uttering,
in the part of "The Stranger," the words "There is another and a better
world," found that, after building his theatre, the Royalty, in
Wellclose Square, that he was prohibited its use, used to give
Pantomimic representations, and just in a similar way as what the minor
theatres did, as mentioned above.

It is amusing to note how the titles of some of Shakespeare's
works--which at one time the Patent theatres had the monopoly--were got
over; "Hamlet" has been known to have been played as "Methinks I see my
Father;" "Othello," as "Is He Jealous?;" "Romeo and Juliet," as "How to
Die for Love;" "The Merchant of Venice," under "Diamond Cut Diamond,"
and so on. Music and dancing also were introduced _ad lib_ into these
performances.

The Pantomime of "Mother Goose," produced at Covent Garden, December 29,
1806, which ran 92 nights, was preceded by "George Barnwell," and
brought some L20,000 into the theatre treasury. Strangely enough, for
about thirty years, it was the unvarying rule to play "George Barnwell"
at this theatre on a Boxing Night, which, from all accounts, owing to
the liveliness of the gods and goddesses assembled on these
occasions--the Tragedy was as much a Pantomime as the Pantomime proper
that followed. Of these "merry moments" Dibdin recalls that Tragedies,
Comedies, and Operas were doomed to suffer all the complicated
combinations of "Pray ask that gentleman to sit down," "Take off your
hat?" and the like. "But the moment," continues Dibdin, "the curtain
goes up (on the Pantomime), if any unfortunate gentleman speaks a word
they make no reply, _but throw him over directly_."

Seemingly afterwards, at Pantomime time, "Barnwell" was discarded in
favour of "Jane Shore," as in "The Theatrical Magazine" we find a writer
penning the following:--

A few years since it was the established rule to play "George Barnwell,"
by way, we suppose, of a "great moral lesson" to the apprentices of
London. In this age of innovation this venerable custom has been broken
down, but the principle seems not wholly to have been abandoned. "Jane
Shore" has supplanted "Barnwell," and the anxieties of the age, are, it
would appear, now directed towards the softer sex. Seriously speaking,
we consider these Christmas selections as exceedingly absurd. Visitants
at this period of the year frequent the theatre less for the purpose of
seeing the play than the Pantomime, and at both theatres it was this
evening their chief, and almost only, attraction; for the tragedy of
Rowe, which is of very little merit, derived but trifling interest or
effect from the performers who personated the prominent characters.
Moreover the lessons of the pulpit have unfortunately but too slight an
influence on those who attend them, and we are rather fearful the moral
benefits to be derived from these stage lectures, to the apprentices and
servants of the metropolis, do not countervail the loss of pleasure
sustained by those who would be so much better pleased; and, therefore,
perhaps, taught by a lively comedy, satirising some of the light vices
or laughable follies of the age. We trust this theatrical nuisance will
be for the future reformed; we can almost excuse the holiday folks for
being turbulent, when we reflect upon the insult offered to their
understandings, in the treatment they receive on these occasions.

In 1830, at Covent Garden Theatre, Peake introduced into the Pantomime
of "Harlequin Pat, and Harlequin Bat" a "speaking opening." Pantomime,
however, pursued the even tenour of its way until the production at the
Adelphi, about 1857, of a Pantomime, with a "burlesque opening," and
"the thin end of the wedge" was provided, written by Mark Lemon. In the
Harlequinade, Madame Celeste appeared as Harlequin _a la Watteau_, and
Miss Mary Keeley was the Columbine. These Extravaganzas, from the pen of
Planche, with scenery by Beverley, and all under the management of
Vestris, afterwards became quite the rage.

I have previously referred to the excellence of Beverley's scenes under
the _regime_ of Madame Vestris. Extravagance in Extravaganzas, like "The
Blue Bird," "Once Upon a Time," and the like, caused the managers, in
the matter of scenery, to enter into serious competition with one
another.

Pantomime, it was thought, was doomed, as its decease at this epoch
seemed impending. It managed, however, to come again into popular
favour, but in a very different shape. Instead of the usual comic
Pantomime it was played by two different sets of performers, and having
no connection with one another. The opening scenes, like a soap bubble,
began to grow larger and larger, the double plot was abandoned, the
Transformation scene became the principal feature, and a long
Harlequinade at the _end_.

In the Pantomime of "Red Riding Hood," written by F.W. Green, and
produced at Her Majesty's Theatre, during the 'eighties, an effort was
made to compose and invent a piece of pure Pantomime. The Vokes family,
J.T. Powers, and others, appeared in this Pantomime.

In France and Italy particularly, the Mimetic Art still flourishes; but
in this country it is practically a lost Art. One of the best examples,
and most successful, we have had in recent years of this ancient form
of entertainment in this country was that of "_L'Enfant Prodigue_,"
played by Mdlle. Jane May and a French Company of Pantomimists. There
are, however, several other very brilliant Pantomimists excellent in
their Art, like the Martinetti troupe, the two brothers Renad, and the
Leopolds.

"It is a pity (observes Dickens, in 'The Theatre') that the knowledge of
it (Pantomime) cannot be more extended among our modern actors and
actresses, so few of whom understand anything about the effectiveness of
appropriate gesture. A few lessons in the business of Harlequin would
teach many a young man, for instance, the simple lesson that arms may be
moved with advantage from the shoulder as well as from the elbow; and so
we should get rid of one of the awkwardest, ugliest, and commonest of
modern stage tricks. And there would be nothing derogatory in the study.
Many of our most distinguished actors have graduated in Pantomime."

Mr. Davenport Adams, writing in "The Theatre," for January, 1882, on the
decline of Pantomime, says:--

"We may say of present-day Pantomime that the trail of the music-hall is
over it all. I admit the extreme ability of certain music-hall
comedians. I object, however, altogether, to the intrusion of such
artists into the domain of Pantomime, and I do so because they, and
others not so able, bring with them, so to speak, an atmosphere which it
is sad to see imported into the theatre. They bring with them, not only
their songs, which, when offensive in their wording, are sometimes made
doubly dangerous by their tunefulness; not only their dances, which are
usually vulgar, when they are not inane, but their style and manner and
'gags,' which are generally the most deplorable of all. The objection to
music-hall artists on the stage is, not only that they take the bread
out of the mouths of 'the profession,' which is a minor consideration
for the public, but that they have the effect of familiarising general
audiences, and children especially, with a style and a kind of singing,
dancing, and 'business' which, however it may be relished by a certain
class of the population, ought steadily to be confined to its original
habitat. The managers are, of course, very much to blame, for it is by
their permission, if not by their desire, that youthful ears are regaled
with 'W'st, w'st, w'st,' and similar elegant compositions. Such songs as
these would not be tolerated by _paterfamilias_ in his drawing-room,
yet, when he takes his children to the Pantomime, they are the most
prominent portion of the entertainment."

In the last century, Pantomimes, in the form so dear to our forefathers,
sometimes twice yearly--at Easter and Christmas--were given. The comic
and other scenes were in that true sense of the word humorous and funny.
The reason was not far to seek, as they were all played by _actors_. The
music-hall had not, as far as Pantomime was concerned, made such inroads
as at the present time it has done into the dramatic profession. Clown,
to _pater_ and _materfamilias_, and others, was a source of genuine
enjoyment; and though they may have passed the sere and yellow leaf of
age, the laughs and hearty merriment of their grand-children gathered
around them made them think of other days, when they were young
themselves. Picture them all, dear reader, sitting in the Family
Circle--now termed the Dress Circle--a happy party with smiling and
contented faces, laughing at some _genuine acting_--Pantomime though it
be--no _double entendre_ songs, and nothing to be ashamed of.

To the young a visit to the Pantomime was invariably a yearly occurrence
to be joyfully remembered till the next Boxing Day came round again. Do
they, or can they, understand Pantomime in its present form? I very much
doubt it.

When towards the close of the 'fifties, and the double plot was
abandoned, the character of Harlequin began to be played by women, the
origin of what is now known as the "principal boy," and some acrobatic
turns, or other speciality business, began to be introduced during the
course of the Pantomime, which greatly discounted the efforts of
Harlequin and Clown.

Another competitor that took up the running to the abolition of Clown
and his companions, was the music-hall, which began introducing
Pantomimes and ballets. The first to do this, some years ago, was the
Canterbury, other halls soon following suit.

The managers of the theatres took up arms, with the result that various
decisions, chiefly averse to the music-halls, were obtained. A decision
of the Court of Common Pleas left the music-halls in a position to give
ballets with costume and scenic effects without any such control or
precautions as was exercised in theatres under the Lord Chamberlain's
authority. The duration of the litigation was all owing to the vague
definition "Stageplays in the 6 and 7 Vict. c. 68," and of "Music,
dancing and public entertainments in the Act 25, Geo. II., c. 30."

Of present-day Pantomime, with the immense sums spent annually on its
gorgeous spectacular display and costly dresses, there is no necessity
for me here to dilate upon, as it is a subject that is well known to us
all. All that is beautiful about it is due principally to the scenic
artists and the costumiers. The best parts are, as a general rule,
allotted to music-hall "stars," whose names will draw the most money.
And the followers of Thespis have, until the reign of King Pantomime is
over, to take oftentimes second-class places in the Pantomimic form of
entertainment of the present day.

In the old days everyone looked forward to the performances of Clown and
his companions; but little by little their business went, until finally
this has dwindled down to about one or two scenes--which, in some few
instances is still retained.

And now to formally "ring down," and in writing the "tag," there is, I
may say, with the sound of the prompter's bell, a melancholy ring as the
passing knell of Clown and his merry companions, and the "tag," as it
were, their epitaph.

Pantomimes--as our forefathers knew them--have become a thing of the
past, and the survivors, Clown and his comrades, the former whose quips
and quiddities, in childhood's happy days, many of us still lovingly
remember; the wonderment with which we gazed at the magical tricks
wrought by Harlequin and his wand; the quaint conceits and ambling gait
of Pantaloon; and, last but not least, bewitching Columbine, with whom,
most likely as each year came round, in youthful ardour we fell anew in
love's toils, are all rapidly vanishing into the dim and distant past,
and to live in the future only in the memory.



CURTAIN.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF PANTOMIME***


******* This file should be named 13469.txt or 13469.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/4/6/13469



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

